DATE WITH ROMANCE. 14 October 1939.
Mrs. Ramsay dressed for her lunch with Gerald Spalding in a mood of fine old nostalgia, well crusted on the top and five years in the wood. It took her some time to decide what to wear. After a good deal of thought she chose the navy alpaca suit with a crisp lingerie blouse, for that made her look very trim and she remembered Gerald had once said she seemed to go around protected by invisible cellophane. Mrs. Ramsay felt that it would be tragic for Gerald to sit in Malaya for five years thinking about a woman in London who looked as though she were protected by invisible cellophane and then be faced with someone limp as a wilted lettuce in crumpled chiffon. The hat was a bit of a problem. Used to women skulking about under double terais, Gerald would possibly shy back in alarm from an old love glimmering at him like a submerged oyster through layers of chenille fishnet or making an Ophelia-like entrance under a haystack of pansies. There was nothing in Mrs. Ramsay’s cupboard that seemed to hit the note, so she went out early for her lunch date and picked up en route a quiet, ladylike little number with a touch of near-widowish melancholy in the veil. She also dropped in for a manicure. Gerald had always been rather foolish about her hands, she remembered.
At Gerald’s club, the hall porter informed Mrs. Ramsay, in discreet confidential tones which made her feel like a naughty Ouida lady visiting a man’s chambers, that Mr. Spalding had not yet arrived. The porter then came out from his dog kennel and smuggled her into a room full of imitation Chippendale furniture and genuine Sheraton members uneasily entertaining female period pieces to a glass of sherry. Mrs. Ramsay sat down on a brocaded sofa, and presently Gerald came hurrying in, fumbling with his ‘gas-mask carton and looking harassed.
‘I'm most awfully sorry,’ he said. ‘I got kept at the doctor's.’
‘Gerald, dear,’ said Mrs. Ramsay softly. She held out both her hands, which Gerald pumped up and down. ‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘old Helen.’ Mrs. Ramsay felt a slight but definite chill. Not noticing that the atmosphere of the tender moment had fallen several degrees, Gerald dropped her hands and sat down.
“What'll you have?’ he asked.
Mrs. Ramsay thought she would take a glass of dry sherry. Gerald ordered a whisky-and-soda for himself. “You get into the habit of stengahs in Malaya,’ he said. ‘Well, chin-chin.’ They drank and gazed at each other, smiling. ‘Old Helen,’ Gerald repeated fatuously. ‘This is nice.’ Mrs. Ramsay noted coldly that he was a good deal yellower than he had been five years ago. ‘How is old Charles?” he asked. ‘And the kiddie? By Jove, she was only a spot of a thing when I was home on leave last.’
Mrs. Ramsay said that old Charles was well and that old Susan had, of course, been shipped off to relatives in the country. ‘But I don’t want to talk about them, I want to talk about you,’ she said. ‘I want to hear all your news, Gerald.’
He patted her knee absently, as though it were the head of a retriever. ‘Before we start, how about some chow?’ he said.
Settled in a dim, panelled corner of the dining-room, Gerald seemed to glow richly, like some citrus fruit. His sombre eye lightened for a moment as he watched Mrs. Ramsay toying prettily with the menu. ‘You've still got lovely hands, Helen,’ he said, in a tone which implied that everything else had gone pretty much to rack and ruin. He ordered steamed fish and Melba toast for himself. ‘I have to be careful about diet,’ he said. ‘It’s my stomach. I told you I'd come straight from the doctor’s this morning.’
Mrs. Ramsay said that she did hope it was nothing serious.
Gerald assured her, with a kind of melancholy pride, that it was. ‘It’s partly the East, I suppose — dysentery and all that— and partly anno Domini too, probably. We're not as young as we were, Helen.’ He did some more retriever-patting under the table.
Mrs. Ramsay, wondering if the kneecap would emit a loud creak, said fretfully that she personally felt very well.
’“Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety,” Gerald said loyally. ‘By Jove, look at that girl’s hat!’ He turned round to crane after an elderly colonel escorting an attractive niece to the door. Gerald said that women’s hats were the craziest things he’d seen in years, but that some of these kids could get away with it and look pretty cute. ‘Now, I knew you'd be wearing a sensible hat,’ he said. Mrs. Ramsay smiled wanly.
With difficulty escaping from Gerald’s stomach, which seemed to pursue the conversation like some particularly active octopus, they chatted about theatres. Gerald said there was nothing like a good show and he hoped the London producers would carry on, as they promised, in spite of the war. He supposed that in the East he missed a good show more than anything else. Then he told about some awfully jolly theatricals someone had got up in Singapore. Towards the end of lunch he extracted a snapshot from his cigarette case and, flushing a startling shade of burnt sienna, passed it over to Mrs. Ramsay. ‘What do you think of it?’ he said. Mrs. Ramsay gazed thoughtfully at a toothy young woman in a bathing suit perched at the edge of a swimming-pool. ‘Strictly under the punkah, we're thinking of getting married,’ Gerald explained. He said that they had met on the boat coming home and that her name was Monica. ‘Of course, she’s heard everything about you,’ he said. “You'll love old Helen,” I told her. She’s only a kid, really. Her husband was a brute - used to come home from the club stinking and knock her about in front of the servants and all that.’
Mrs. Ramsay reflected that his aim must have been indifferent, for Monica’s front teeth seemed many more than were strictly usual. She passed the snapshot back to Gerald and said briskly that she was so glad.
‘In spite of all she’s been through, she’s the youngest thing you ever saw,’ said Gerald.
‘Isn't that nice?’ said Mrs. Ramsay. She felt that age had withered and custom staled Gerald’s infinite variety considerably, and she improvised an early appointment at the hairdresser’s.
“Monica can sit on her hair,’ said Gerald. ‘You never saw such stuff — naturally blond, too.’
Mrs. Ramsay, deciding that she would find no difficulty in sitting on Monica’s hair either if Monica’s head were included, said that she really must be running along now.
At the last moment, Gerald seemed inclined to be sentimental. ‘I want you to meet Monica soon,’ he said. ‘Do you know what attracted me about her first, Helen? She
As soon as she was out of sight round the corner, Mrs. Ramsay took out her handbag mirror and anxiously inspected her teeth. They seemed much as usual and more or less under control. For a while she felt a little low; then, as she crossed the street, she caught sight of her reflection in a shop window and she couldn’t help observing how nice she looked in the navy alpaca suit. It was odd how Gerald had changed when she herself looked precisely the way she had always looked. Poor Gerald, thought Mrs. Ramsay. Already she felt a good deal cellophane, away from the dear and mercifully stone-dead past.
MEETING AT THE PRINGLES’ 6 January 1940
The committee met in the drawing-room at Laburnum Cottage, the home of two ladies invariably known as the Pringle girls. One of the Pringle girls had been wedded and widowed and was now Mrs. Carver. Neither of them was likely to see fifty again, but Pringle girls they remained, their girlishness rather ghoulishly preserved, like the dried flowers and pampas grass that rustled in the draught from the drawing-room door. The room was extremely cold. Although it was a chilly evening, there was no fire in the grate, nothing but a pyramid of more dried vegetable matter — pine cones this time, gilded and backed by a fan of pleated pink paper. Itoccurred to Mrs. Taylor that the committee would be a good deal cosier in the dining-room, where she had noticed the stout terrier Chappie wheezing on the rug in front of a bright little fire. Tradition, however, demanded that committees should meet in the drawing-room. Mrs. Taylor sighed, crossed her stout legs in their grey woollen stockings, and gazed expectantly at Mrs. Peake, who had risen to address the meeting.
Mrs. Peake explained that the committee had been called together to organise a Hospital Supplies Depot in the village. She was opening proceedings in her capacity as chairman of the local Women’s Voluntary Services because someone had to do it — otherwise there was no reason Miss Craddock, representing the Personal Service League, or Mrs. Taylor, secretary of the Women’s Institute, should not be in the chair.
‘Nonsense, Doris, you do it much better,’ said Miss Craddock briskly.
Mrs. Peake said she just wanted to make it clear that there were going to be no particular bosses on this job and that all the different village interests were going to pool their resources for the one cause. She would now call on Mrs. Carver to tell them more about the scheme, and, before sitting down, she would like to propose that Mrs. Carver, who had done such excellent work in the Great War, should be elected as officer-in-charge of the whole organisation.
‘I second that,’ snapped Miss Craddock.
Mrs. Carver said unconvincingly that it was very nice of everybody, but she didn’t know why it should be her. The committee murmured polite encouragement.
“Well, if I could have Lois to help me,’ Mrs. Carver said, ‘I mean it’s going to be quite a big job. It will take two of us easily.’
The unmarried Pringle girl, folding her arms across her thin bosom, stared gloomily at her sister through her I don’t know whether I'd be much help,’ she said. ‘Inever did have any brains, you know that, Alice.’
‘Then that’s carried unanimously!’ Mrs. Peake cried. ‘Mrs. Carver has kindly promised to be our officer-in-charge, with Miss Lois Pringle as her second-in-command. Although this is such an informal meeting, I think someone ought to take a few notes, don’t you?’
The election was duly recorded by Mrs. Taylor, and the ladies gave their attention to Mrs. Carver.
‘Before we go any further, we've got to decide what work we're going to do and where we're going to do it,’ Mrs. Carver announced. ‘I've been to see one or two people about it already. Lois and I drove in to Sherbury this morning to see Mrs. Peters, the Regional Organiser, and I must say that what she had to say was rather upsetting. In the first place, if we want to make any surgical dressings at all, we must supply a room which can be passed as completely sterile by the medical authorities. Walls and floor washed down every time it’s been used, you know, and all that nonsense. “If you insist on a room like that,” I said to Mrs. Peters, “you won't get a single splint made in any village the length and breadth of England.” I said to her, “In the last war my sister and I made surgical swabs by the thousand just in Mrs. Robertson’s drawing-room - and there wasn’t anything particularly sterile about that.” “Well,” said Mrs. Peters, “I quite see your point, Mrs. Carver, and I can’t say that I’m not in sympathy with you, but those at the minute are the orders from headquarters.”
A babble of dismayed talk broke out. Everyone agreed that it was ridiculous and that there wasn’t a room to meet those requirements in the village.
‘How about the stage at the Village Hall?’ suggested Mrs. Taylor. ‘It’s nice and bare, and I suppose we could get it scrubbed after we used it.’
‘My dear, think of the germs in those curtains,’ said Mrs. Peake, shuddering. ‘All the children acting scenes from As You Like It and simply septic with colds and chicken pox. I really don’t think it would be awfully good. How about the big playroom at the Dysons’?’
Miss Craddock reminded her that the Dysons were sleeping twenty mothers and children evacuated from London.
‘There’s the room at The George,’ said Miss Pringle doubtfully.
‘Good gracious, Lois! You don’t want the dressings to reek of beer, do you?’ Miss Craddock said.
‘Well, if it’s quite agreed that we are unable to produce a pure room in this village,’ Mrs. Peake said playfully, ‘I should like to say that Miss Judd has kindly offered her drawing-room and study for the use of the working party. It’s got a lot to recommend it. It’s central -’
‘That’s another thing,’ said Mrs. Taylor. ‘Now that we haven’t got the petrol, you've got to think how people are going to get in to the Depot.’
Mrs. Peake said that they would have to consider the practicality of having one central Depot and one or two lesser ones in different parts of the village. Lady Buxton had rung her up yesterday and asked if they would like her to start a small working party at Croom, just for tenants’ wives and people around. Mrs. Peake had explained that of course such a party would have to be affiliated as an offshoot of Mrs. Carver's, and that if Mrs. Carver had no objection —
‘Not in the least,’ said Mrs. Carver. “Let her have an offshoot by all means. Let’s hear more about Miss Judd’s drawing-room. I can’t remember if it’s got cupboards or not. In the last war we used to put the work away in cardboard boxes, but in this war I suppose we'll have to be a good deal more fussy.’
After some discussion, Mrs. Taylor was able to record a resolution that it was decided to accept Miss Judd’s kind offer of rooms for the working party.
‘T think we’ll have to start a little subscription for lighting and heating,’ said Mrs. Peake.
‘Yes, we'll have to have some sort of heating,’ agreed Mrs. Carver.
The committee politely hid their lavender knuckles and agreed.
‘It’s wonderful, though, how the dahlias kept on,’ said ‘Mrs. Taylor, ‘They were a sight this year. Our Jane Cowls are really a picture, only we them a little difficult to keep from year to year I don’t know why.’
Mrs. Taylor was led back sternly from tubers to pneumonia jackets by Mrs. Carver, who said that she would write up to the Red Cross for patterns. At first, she supposed, they had better concentrate on such surgical supplies as they would be allowed to make in the septic surroundings of Miss Judd’s drawing-room. She put her glasses in their case and snapped it shut, as though the Regional Organiser’s neck were inside it.
Mrs. Peake, gathering the meeting together with a smiling glance, said, ‘If no other lady has any more questions to ask, I almost think we might adjourn.”
No other lady had. The committee started getting to their feet and inserting their lifeless hands into doeskin gloves. The Pringle girls came to the front door and waved goodbye, first to Miss Craddock, who got on her bicycle and shot off into the twilight, then to Mrs. Peake and Mrs. Taylor, who were going in Mrs. Peake’s car. At the bow window in the dining-room, the figure of the Pringles’ little maid could be seen, mounted on a carved Ashanti stool and struggling wildly among the folds of black rep with which she was completing the Laburnum Cottage blackout.
‘Then I'll ring up Lady Buxton tonight about her offshoot!’ shouted Mrs. Carver.
‘Do!’ cried Mrs. Peake. ‘I know she'll be helpful.”
The ladies drove away and the Pringle girls went indoors to sit by the dining-room fire with Chappie and the wireless. They had missed the six o’clock news, but at nine o'clock the familiar gentlemanly voice told bits about the war and the King and ration cards. After it was over, Mrs. Carver went out into the hall to telephone Lady Buxton. Lois could hear her voice, brisk and cheerful, in the pauses between ‘Tipperary’ and other jolly old favourites that the B.B.C. was relaying from a soldiers’ concert party.
‘It’s a long way to Tipperar-ee —"
‘Of course it’s nonsense!’ Mrs. Carver was shouting into the telephone. ‘I said to Mrs. Peters that you’d never find a perfectly antiseptic room in any village. “In the last war,” I said to her -’
‘But my heart's right there!’ roared the voices of the potential customers in whose service the ladies were being so busy and happy — happier, as a matter of fact, than they had been for the last twenty-one years.
MRS. RAMSAY’S WAR 27 January 1940
It was before lunch on a dark January day in the Ramsays’ country cottage in Sussex. Just how dark January could be, Mrs. Ramsay reflected gloomily, no one would ever know who had not spent it in a delightful little Tudor gem with a wealth of old oak and several interesting original features (such as the beam on which you knocked your head outside the bathroom). The log fire was smoking in its interesting original way and an angry hiss of plumbing told the exact whereabouts of Nannie Hunter and her charge. Mrs. Ramsay was brooding over the tendency of these fascinating old houses to filter noise upwards and downward when the door opened and Mrs. Parmenter came in, carrying a bunch of snowdrops in one hand and a small vase in the other.
‘I just had to run out between the showers and get a few,’ she said. ‘A room never looks like home without flowers, don’t you agree, dear?’
Mrs. Ramsay thought it would take the Chelsea Flower Show to make this one feel like home but that perhaps it was beginning to feel like Mrs. Parmenter’s home. Mrs. Parmenter was Alison Hunter’s mother, a widow who lived in a handsome flat in Prince’s Gate. When war broke out, Mrs. Hunter had rung up and asked if Mrs. Ramsay would have her little girl and Nannie to stay for the duration down at the Sussex cottage. Mrs. Hunter herself was driving an ambulance and couldn't leave town,
‘Camilla will be nice company for your Susan,’ she had said.
Mrs. Ramsay mentioned mildly that Alan Carpenter and his nurse were staying there too, so Susan would have quite a party. Mrs. Hunter then asked if Mrs. Ramsay could possibly have Mrs. Parmenter — for a bit, anyway. Mrs. Ramsay had replied firmly that she couldn’t possibly do it, but Mrs. Hunter had said that Mummy would be no trouble because she would bring Jessie to help in the house, and that the whole party would arrive on Tuesday.
‘You’ve taken such a load off my mind, Helen darling,’ she had said, ringing off, and on Tuesday the load had arrived as advertised, in a hired Daimler which bulged with Mrs. Parmenter, Camilla on Nannie’s knee, several rolls of bedding, the parlourmaid, two Pekinese, and a quantity of luggage.
All autumn Mrs. Parmenter had run out between the showers and picked the asters, saying brightly that an old woman must be allowed to do something around the house. Opposition would hardly have been hysterical if she had offered to make the beds, but her tastes appeared to be floral. Now it was January and the snowdrops, and before you knew where you were, Mrs. Ramsay thought morbidly, it would be May and the tulips. Somehow she had never expected to spend the war having a Battle of Flowers with Mrs. Parmenter.
‘Such a nasty day,’ said Mrs. Parmenter, standing off from the vase to see the effect. ‘San Toy has got his asthma again, poor little dog.’
Mrs. Ramsay said quickly that she was afraid the cottage was damp and wasn't really meant for a winter home.
‘But how we shall revel in the spring when it comes!’ cried Mrs. Parmenter. ‘There! Don’t their brave little faces give you fresh hope?’ Mrs. Ramsay felt that it would take more than a few snowdrops to give her fresh hope. It would take something really big, like the back end of a Daimler loaded with Parmenter luggage going rapidly towards London.
Mrs. Parmenter, abandoning the brave little faces and adopting a steelier note, asked if Yum-Yum could have less potato in his dinner today.
‘I'm afraid your nice cookie doesn’t quite understand how drefful spoilt my little fellows are,’ she said.
Jessie came tripping through the hall and sounded the gong, nostalgia for Prince’s Gate written large in every loop of her crisp organdie bows. She then retreated into the dining- room, and a confused roaring noise announced that the children were coming downstairs for the communal nursery lunch. Everyone got wedged into the room somehow, bibs were hitched round necks, and a subterranean wheezing located Mrs. Parmenter’s little fellows right under their patron’s chair. Mrs. Ramsay, carving the lamb and listening to the nurses babbling of cardigan patterns, thought moodily that this kind of thing might go on for years. Of course it would be fascinating to watch the children growing up right under one’s eyes. The girls would become young women almost imperceptibly and Mrs. Parmenter would be running out between the showers to pick the roses for Camilla’s wedding bouquet.
Mrs. Parmenter was asking if she had heard from Charles. ‘It must be such a comfort to you, dear, to know that he’s safe, at any rate,’ she said, ‘and such a comfort to him to feel that you’re being well looked after.’ Her roguish eye implied that without her restraining chaperonage Mrs. Ramsay would be helling around Sussex, probably in the nude.
Mrs. Ramsay, smiling wanly, said that she didn’t know ifan anti-aircraft gun near an arsenal was so terribly safe, really, but Mrs. Parmenter said that she'd heard on good authority that the Germans were not going to send over many raids.
‘This came straight from Winnie Carruthers, whose nephew is something very high up in the War Office, so I think we can rely on it,’ she said.
Mrs. Ramsay resisted the impulse to ask why, if Winnie Carruthers’ nephew was as reliable as all that, Mrs. Parmenter and Jessie were not sitting cosily in Prince’s Gate. All the children ate very slowly, apparently acting on the Gladstonian principle of thorough mastication. Their nurses urged them on, still chattering of cardigans.
‘What is it, Jessie?’ asked Mrs. Parmenter, inspecting the steamed apple pudding, which Jessie proffered, as though it were straight from the recipe book of the Borgias. Then she said that if Mrs. Ramsay’s nice cookie wouldn't be offended, she would just take a little fresh fruit.
After lunch the nurses, hung round with gas masks, took the children for a walk. Mrs. Ramsay wanted to write to Charles, but Mrs. Parmenter was at the writing table, so she went out to find the gardener, a dour and hairy man who seldom if ever talked of cardigans. He said nothing about revelling in the spring but prophesied the failure of all the early crops and aimed a clod of earth at one of Mrs. Parmenter’s little fellows who was delicately scratching in the onion bed. Mrs. Ramsay found him a great comfort. When she got back to the house, Mrs. Parmenter was still at the writing table.
That evening Susan, saying good night, remarked that she didn’t want Camilla and Alan to go, ever. Mrs. Ramsay felt impelled to hit her smartly over the head but instead went downstairs to the living-room, where Mrs. Parmenter was knitting under the good light and listening to the wireless.
‘I was just thinking, dear, that if you had no objection I might get a few of my own things down from Prince's Gate,’ she said. ‘One does miss one’s own bits and pieces, don’t you agree?”
Mrs. Ramsay, picking her way among suspiciously growling Pekinese, remembered with a good deal of wistful- ness the poet’s assurance that the grave was a fine and private place.
After the nine o'clock news bulletin, Mrs. Parmenter let Yum-Yum and San Toy into the garden, where they disappeared in a frenzy of yapping. ‘They feel they’re guarding me,’ said Mrs. Parmenter indulgently. ‘Silly little Yum-Yum, don’tyou know that it’s not our home, sweetheart?’ Mrs.  Ramsay felt that it was, though. 