FIN DE SIECLE 12 July 1941
It wasn’t necessary for Don Merrill to join up; the Ministry of Labour and National Service hadn't called his age group yet. But with the Merrills it was less a question of heroics than of eating or not eating. Because of the war, no one seemed anxious to buy Don’s pictures or to let Ernestine design a room. Even if people had the money to spare, they didn’t want to spend it on things which, experience had shown, were subject to splintering and mangling. People wanted to buy something solid, a few acres of ground on which to raise chickens and pigs and grow food to eat. ‘Safe as houses’ was a maxim which meant nothing nowadays with the dust drifting round London, fine brick dust that got in the eyes and made women’s black clothes look grey and unfresh. Don went into the Army because he couldn’t think what else to do.
Ernestine Merrill had never expected to find herself a soldier's wife. She and Don had both been ardent pacifists right up to Munich, and they had often made disparaging remarks about the military caste. Now here she was, drawing her wife’s allowance every week at the post office and liking it. It was wonderful to be able to go out and buy a chop and pay for it instead of getting it on tick because some bitch of a woman hadn't yet paid for having her dining-room done over from Regency to Ernestine Merrill. When she first saw Don in khaki it was a shock, certainly. During peacetime his tastes ran to tough, richly coloured shirts and hairy neckties of peasant inspiration. In his uniform he looked drab as a sparrow, all buttoned up and slicked down.
At first he made little jokes about his new life. It was rather like going back to school, really, he wrote to her. You did what you were told, you ate and slept at regular hours, you began to get keen about all sorts of idiotic things. When he was singled out for a commission, it became apparent that the keenness was real, not ironic. The first few times she heard him talking about ‘we’ it took her a moment or two to realise that he didn’t mean the calm domestic ‘we, Don and Ernestine, but the regiment to which he was going to be attached. Already he had identified himself with it.
He finished his officer-cadet training course and came up to London for seven days’ leave before being posted to his unit. On the surface, their life for that week reverted to normal. They got up late, dressed leisurely, and went out every night. The studio, which had acquired a chilly, almost virginal air while Don was away, once more became human with his clothing scattered about, the smell of his pipe and of male food cooking. Ernestine had not realised how bored she was with the scrappy feminine trays she had been languidly fixing for herself.
Picking up the telephone one night, Don said, ‘Let's get hold of everyone. I want to talk. God, how I want to talk!’
It was difficult to get a few friends together nowadays ~ quite ridiculously difficult: The war had a frightening way of making them vanish into thin air. You dialled a number and the phone rang and rang until someone beside you said ‘Didn't you know? She's taken the children to New York’ or ‘Aren't they in Cornwall?’ or, rather thoughtfully, ‘Of course, it was a bad blitz last night.’ The Merrills’ crowd had been entirely split up. Paul Hathaway, who used to run the precious little Ulysses Press, was a fighter pilot. Elliot Quinn was toting a Home Guard rifle with retired Tory generals in the intervals of his censorship job. Linda was a nurse. Before the war she had been fashion editor of a glossy weekly, going to all the Paris collections, always looking the picture of what more timid women would do their best to look like next season. It was funny seeing her in her unbecoming nurse's cap, her nails short and without varnish. Little Jimmy Shaw, who had shared a house with the Merrills one painting summer near Auxerre, had been killed in action. The list could go on indefinitely. All over London telephone bells were ringing angrily through empty rooms over which the fine brick dust, seeping in at shuttered windows, was beginning to settle.
Most of all, thought Ernestine, the talk for which Don seemed so hungry was different. There was no conversation that wasn't about the war. People talked only of themselves, their jobs, their bombs, their version of Don’s new ‘we’. She tried to remember what they had talked about before the war. She couldn't. All those good evenings belonged now to the sociologists, the scholars of the future browsing among the remains of the doomed thirties. She wondered if Don felt the same, but he didn’t say anything. In the end they went out to dinner alone. Familiar faces, strange over unfamiliar uniforms, swam into focus through the cigarette haze in the Café Royal. The seven days passed in a flash. She had the feeling that he was really quite pleased to be going back.
After Don left, there seemed to Ernestine to be no point in staying in London, and the next weekend she went down to the country to look for rooms that would be near him. It was a coincidence that Don should be stationed in a place that both he and Ernestine knew well. They had often stayed with Walter and Miriam Brady in the white house that Walter had built on a hill where it could be plainly seen, flashing in the sun, an airy glass insult to the spinsters and the retired colonels of the valley as they looked through their leaded Tudor panes. The house had been a centre for the Merrills’ crowd in the old days, but the Bradys weren’t there any more. The war had finished Walter's profession as it had finished Don’s and Ernestine’s. After waiting about for some time in the queue of well-known architects who were hoping for government jobs, he had joined the Air Force and Miriam had taken the boy to Australia. They were two of the friends who had simply vanished.
‘Now I know what was wrong with my leave,’ Don said. “Walter wasn’t there to talk to. I'd have liked to talk to Walter.’
It was his first admission, Ernestine noticed, that anything atall had been wrong with his leave.
“You won't be bored, because all the other wives are down here too,’ he had said when he met her at the train. She looked at him cautiously. Remarks which six months ago would have been meant ironically were often quite serious now, and she didn’t want to laugh when she wasn’t supposed to. His face was unsmiling.
‘I'm longing to meet them,’ she said.
She had brought down a lot of khaki wool and she sat with Don in the little bar of the local pub, knitting:a pullover, like all the other women. She hadn’t knitted for years and she was slow at it, but it seemed to be the right thing to do. ‘Oh, that pattern!’ the wives would say cosily, dropping into a neighbouring chair. ‘I’ve just done it for Jim. You'll find ita bit of a beast when you come to the neck.’ The pub was full of regiment and so was the village, but there were still one or two cottages they might try for rooms, the landlord said as he passed Don's beer and Ernestine’s sherry over the counter. ‘One of them must be very near the Bradys’ place,’ Don said.
“Mr. Brady?’ said the landlord. ‘Ah, he’s gone now. In the Air Force, so they tell me.’
“Yes, the last I heard, he was in Egypt,’ said Don.
The landlord didn’t seem very communicative. Maybe, Ernestine suggested as they finished their drinks and went out, maybe Walter had gone away owing him money. Don said he wouldn't be surprised. It would be more surprising to find someone to whom Walter didn’t owe money. They laughed as they thought of him, in his shocking old sweater and sailcloth trousers, going into the pub as though he owned it, shouting for the landlord, and taking away gin and beer for the houseful of thirsty weekend guests.
‘Remember that last weekend?’ said Ernestine. ‘Linda and Jimmy were there. We were all sun-bathing on the terrace and Jimmy was painting Miriam. Remember? It must have been the August just before the war.’
“We might go and look at the house on our way,’ Don said. ‘I wonder if it’s been bought yet. I forgot to ask.”
The first thing they saw as they came round the corner of the familiar lane was a big board, ‘For Sale’. Across it a smaller board said despondently, ‘No reasonable offer refused’. Don stopped the car.
‘Let’s take a walk round now,’ he said. “We can go and ask about the rooms afterwards. It’s probably those cottages just across the way.”
A man was working in one of the cottage gardens, digging a piece of ground among the apple trees. He stopped working and watched them as they pushed open Walter’s gate and walked up the drive. Ernestine was feeling fine because it was a nice day and she was with Don. She looked at him out of the corner of her eye and thought how well and how young he looked in his new uniform. For years he had looked permanently worried. Anxiety had settled in fine lines round his eyes and lips, but now he was tanned and contented, with the contentment of a man who knows where his next meal and a whole settled future of next meals are coming from. Ernestine slipped her hand under his arm, and he looked at her and smiled.
‘Poor old Walter,’ he said.
She had not been thinking of Walter, and now she looked guiltily at Walter's house. She told herself that all houses empty for a long time had that same sordid and derelict air. But Walter’s house seemed especially forlorn. It looked like something left over from an exhibition, a section of some démodé World’s Fair that people would presently come and take down and cart away. They walked round the terrace and peered through the enormous sliding glass walls that Walter had built in defiance of this windy country and the English climate. There was dust on the shining black composition floors; spiders had established a colony in the specially heated vitrines where Miriam had kept her tropical plants.
‘It looks funny without the Dufy on that wall,’ Ernestine said.
‘It looks funniest of all without Walter,’ Don said. As if by agreement, they straightened up and walked rapidly down the drive, not looking back.
Yes, Ernestine thought, it’s funniest of all without Walter. And without Miriam and Linda and Elliot, Paul and Jimmy and the rest of them. They had gone, and the integrity, the personality of the house had splintered like matchwood. Nobody knew where Walter was. He might be dead. Jimmy was dead, and so were Peter Nash and Nicholas. David had gone to California in the rout of the intellectuals. Lovely Linda was dosing tubercular clerks with cough mixture in a Brixton cellar. Going back to Walter’s house had been like visiting a cemetery where there were no tidy tombstones recording beginnings and endings but only question marks over the graves. She looked at Don to see if his flesh was creeping too, and decided that he was thinking of something else. He looked at the view appraisingly as he shut the gate.
‘We're having a three-day exercise over this area next week,’ he said. ‘Tanks and the whole works. It’s grand country for tanks.’
‘It must be, darling,’ she said.
The man digging in the garden opposite had come up to his hedge and was leaning on his spade, waiting for them. ‘If you're wanting the key, the agent at Sarumcester has it,’ he said.
“We don’t want the key,’ said Don. ‘We were just having a look around.’
‘The man wiped his face with the back of his hand and nodded cheerfully. He looked Don up and down. ‘Ah, it’s not the sort of place you'd like, sir,’ he said. ‘There’s many as stops to look, out of curiosity, you might say, but they never wants the key. Who'd be wanting an outlandish place as that is? A regular landmark it is to the bombers, shouldn't wonder, standing out on the hilltop so white and flashing. See it miles off, young fellow in the Air Force tells my son.’
‘It could be camouflaged,’ Don said.
‘Ah, it could be,’ the man said dubiously. ‘But then, think of the blackout, sir! That's what a gentleman who comes to look at it says to me. “Think of all that glass and the blackout,” he says. Oh no, it wouldn't do for you and the lady, sir. A funny bunch used to be there — a Mr. Brady and his friends down from London. Yes, a regular funny bunch.’ He looked at Don again, friendly and respectful, his blue eyes smiling as they glanced over the spick-and-span uniform. “They weren't your sort at all, sir. Notat all.’
Ernestine looked at Don. He was smiling too. She waited for him to explain that they were friends of the Bradys and knew the house well. But instead, he said in a brisk, pleasant voice, ‘As a matter of fact, we're not house-hunting at all. We're trying to find a billet for my wife. Perhaps you can tell us where Mrs. Coombes lives?’
LITERARY SCANDAL AT THE SEWING PARTY 6 September 1941
Mrs. Ramsay’s Red Cross sewing party did not often stray from the realities of life as they sat in her dining-room stitching pyjamas and assembling the component parts of an elaborate winceyette octopus known as a many-tail bandage. The conversation rarely touched on other topics than the gossip of the little Sussex village, which Mrs. Ramsay had once innocently looked upon as a sleepy hamlet where nothing ever happened. She was now considerably better educated. Sometimes she shivered slightly at the ease with which the ladies kept themselves informed of what was going on beneath every picturesque roof in the place, from the humblest cottage up to the Manor. Mrs. Peters, the wife of the head groom at the big house, seemed to be able to tell whena young wife was ‘expecting’ even before the young woman had realised it herself, and she had an equally uncomfortable knack of recognising what was sepulchrally termed ‘the look’ on a doomed person’s face. Occasionally Mrs. Ramsay felt that she was sitting in at a sewing bee of the Fates, all busy with shears and thread, snipping ata life here, twining two strands with a knowing cackle there.
Every now and then, however, the conversation reached a more intellectual level. It was on one of these afternoons that Mrs. Twistle dropped her bombshell. She did it gently, for everything about Mrs. Twistle, who had been in ducal service as a girl, was gentle except her opinions, which were frequently of a startling violence. ‘When the voice of the people is heard, then, Madam, if you'll excuse me saying so, there’s gentlemen in the present government as will find theirselves facing a firing squad’ was one of the utterances that Mrs. Ramsay always found a trifle macabre issuing from the lips of a dovelike individual with pink cheeks and an Alexandra fringe.
The afternoon had begun with a little mild chatter about how much better it was to live in one of the old cottages than in the nasty new boxes the Council was putting up when Mrs. Twistle gave the modest cough which generally preceded her entry into the conversation.
“Talking of old houses,’ she observed to the company in general, ‘reminds me of the old place I was in the first time I ever went out to service, before I was with Her Grace. Oh, it was quaint! Everything was just as it used to be, and the gentleman wouldn't have it modernised on no account. Stella Place was the name of it, over the other side of Foxley Green.’
Mrs. Peters stopped buttonholing. ‘Stella Place!’ she said with a snort. ‘Ow, what a name! Whatever will they think up next? Why not Elsie Place or Maud Place while they’re about it?”
“Well, it was on account of its history, Mrs. Peters,’ said Mrs. Twistle, smiling indulgently. ‘Ever so many years ago a gentleman called Dean Swift murdered a young lady called Stella there.’
Mrs. Ramsay started violently. So did Mrs. Lovelace, who clutched the pince-nez off her nose and stared with horror at Mrs. Twistle’s placid countenance. ‘Murdered,’ she said faintly. ‘How dreadful! If I'd been you, Mrs. Twistle, I shouldn't have been able to sleep a wink in the nasty place.’
‘Us girls, being young and silly, used to fancy that we heard something when we came back late from our half-days out,’ Mrs. Twistle said. ‘Maybe it was the Dean come back, and maybe it wasn’t. Anyway, there was the pore lady’s blood under the rug on the parlour floor. The parlourmaid let me have a peep one day. They'd tried and tried to get the stains out, she said, but nothing would move them.’
“Uman blood,’ Mrs. Garner said. ‘Nothing will move it. 'Ave you ever been to Stone’enge, Mrs. Twistle? Fred and me went there on a charabang trip one Easter Monday. There’s ’uman bloodstains on some of those enormous great stones, so they say, left there by the Druids, and you can’t budge them.’ To Mrs. Ramsay's slightly dazed fancy, Mrs. Garner appeared to be licking her lips.
‘Ow, Druids!’ Mrs. Peters exclaimed scornfully, as though she had always suspected them of being a slovenly lot of creatures who wouldn't think of mopping up afterwards. ‘All I can say is give m nty minutes at Stonehenge with a good, stiffbrush and Vim, and I'd get the place so you wouldn't object to eating your dinner off it.’
‘No doubt you would, Mrs. Peters,’ Mrs. Twistle murmured. ‘But the fact remains that I saw the marks with my own eyes, as distinct as they was, no doubt, on the day when the pore soul was struck down.’
Needles were suspended while the circle gave its heavily breathing attention to the tragedy. Mrs. Dogberry, who was deaf but had somehow had the facts communicated to her in a series of piercing whispers by her neighbours, suddenly shouted, ‘What made Dean bash her, Mrs. Twistle?”
With a meaning glance at Mrs. Lovelace’s unmarried daughter, who was sitting with her mouth open, Mrs. Twistle replied, ‘Some say one thing and some another, Mrs. Dogberry.’
There was a pause, broken by a wild giggle from Elsie Lovelace, whose risible faculties were frequently out of control. Her mother sighed. ‘What a shocking thing!’ she said. ‘I've heard of Dean Swift, now you mention it. A writer, wasn’t he?”
‘Ow, writers!’ cried Mrs. Peters, as though she lumped the profession with the Druids in one disreputable whole.
‘I believe that he wrote the lady letters,’ Mrs. Twistle whispered. ‘Beautiful letters, hundreds and hundreds of them. I fancy they was printed in a book. It does seem sad that after all that the gentleman should have yielded to such a horrid impulse.’
‘Ow, well, perhaps the pore man got tired of waiting for an answer,’ Mrs. Peters said, and snickered. ‘I remember Daddy used to get wild with me’ — the party understood that she was referring to Mr. Peters and not to her paternal ancestor — ‘when I was away in service before we were married and he didn’t have his weekly letter. I suppose he used to wonder if I wasn’t larking with some other boy. Pore Daddy.’
Resisting the impulse to dwell on the vision of Mrs. Peters nubile and larking, Mrs. Ramsay felt that the moment had come to stir from the dreamy trance in which she had been listening and stitching on buttons. ‘I think you must be confusing Dean Swift with someone else, aren’t you, Mrs. Twistle?’ she said. ‘He certainly wrote letters to someone called Stella, and she certainly died fairly young, but I’m afraid’ — she smiled apologetically round the table - ‘I’m afraid quite naturally.’
The faces of the sewing party expressed a struggle between their desire to believe Mrs. Ramsay, who was held to be a model of elegant culture and book learning, and their faith in Mrs. Twistle, who had seen the nasty evidence under the parlour rug.
Mrs. Peters suddenly made up her mind. ‘Ow, of course you're mixing him up, Mrs. Twistle!’ she cried. ‘Why, he was a dean, wasn’t he? Who ever heard of a dean murdering anybody, I'd like to know.’
The others looked thoughtful, as though they were searching their memories for bloody doings at the Deanery. Mrs. Ramsay noted apprehensively that Mrs. ‘Twistle’s shining cheeks were a couple of shades rosier as she said, with deceptive softness, ‘If you'll forgive me for saying so, Mrs. Peters, I consider as how that is a very unfair idea. Because a gentleman is in high places, there’s some people as will never suspect him of doing anything he oughtn’t to. If it were Mr. Peters or Mr. Twistle now, it would be a very different story, no doubt.’
“Ow! Daddy murdering someone! That's a good one, I must say,’ Mrs. Peters said indignantly.
'Mr. Peters is, after all, only flesh and blood, capable of ‘human passions like the rest,’ said Mrs. Twistle.
This was new and fascinating idea to Mrs. Ramsay, who had hitherto been inclined to think of Mr. Peters as a pair of spindly gaiters and a checked cap. Judging from the expression on Mrs. Peters’ face, it was also a new idea to her. She kept a brooding silence for some minutes while the rest of the party sewed furiously and thought of Mr. Peters and human passions.
Mrs. Ramsay was hoping that everything was going to blow over nicely when Mrs. Peters suddenly demanded, ‘If the Dean did murder the lady, Mrs. Twistle, I suppose he was took up for it?”
‘He was not,’ said Mrs. Twistle.
‘Ow, now, that settles it that you’ve got it wrong,’ Mrs. Peters said. ‘Everybody knows that British justice is going to get you if you do a murder, no matter if you’re a dean or Archbishop of Canterbury. Wearing your collar back to front isn’t going to make no difference to British justice, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, no, very definitely not!’
‘Influence, no doubt, Mrs. Peters,’ whispered Mrs. Twistle, calmly enough, but with her Alexandra fringe quivering ominously. ‘Influence has been responsible for saving many a gentleman from the common hangman's grave, as you might say. If it had been Mr. Peters, the noose would have been round his neck before the pore lady was cold.’
Mrs. Ramsay intervened hastily. ‘Dean Swift is buried in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin,’ she said. ‘So I'm afraid that shows, doesn’t it, that you've got things a litle ~
‘With a tablet, I daresay,’ said Mrs. Twistle bitterly. ‘I’m naming no names, but there’s plenty of gentlemen lying snug in Westminster Abbey this minute who ought by rights — excuse me, Madam — to be buried at the crossroads with a stake through their black hearts.’
There was a hysterical yelp from Elsie Lovelace and a shocked ‘My goodness, what a dreadful idea!’ from Mrs. Lovelace, who was fixing a blue striped sleeve into a pink striped armhole in her agitation.
‘Bolshie, I call it,’ said Mrs. Peters, jabbing a needle into her needlecase.
Mrs. Twistle gently patted her fringe. 'As I understand from Mr. Churchill that the Russian gentlemen are now our glorious allies, Mrs. Peters, the term “Bolshie” doesn’t quite imply any longer what I take it you was trying to imply, Mrs. Peters,’ she said.
Mrs. Ramsay was wishing distractedly that the needle- case, with its bristling arsenal winking temptingly, was not still in Mrs, Peters’ hand when Mrs. Dogberry sailed into the conversation. Having long since lost any idea of what everyone else was talking about, she introduced one of her abrupt conversational switches by shouting, ‘Have you heard that little Mrs. Clark up at Tiggs Farm is expecting again?’
In the ensuing cosy chat, which seemed to Mrs. Ramsay to be anice blend of robust Elizabethan dialogue and a few extracts from the fertility rites of the aboriginals, the previous topic was happily forgotten. And when the sewing party finally put on their hats and creaked out, Mrs. Ramsay was slightly bewildered to see Mrs. Twistle and Mrs. Peters going off up the lane together, apparently on amiable terms and engaged in animated discussion of the best way of keeping colour in gooseberry jam.
 GOODBYE, MY LOVE 13 December 1941
Adrian’s mother welcomed them as though this were just an ordinary visit, with nothing particular about it. They found her, as they had found her so many times before, working in the big herbaceous border facing the sea, crouching girlishly with a frail little green plant in the palm of one earthy hand. She greeted them abstractedly, pushing back her wispy grey hair with the back of the hand that held the trowel and leaving asmudge. While they talked, Ruth looked at the border, which Adrian had built for his mother on a ledge of the cliff garden, facing it with a paved path beside which the rosemary and the seeded mulleins sprang. Even now, in late autumn, with the sea mist hanging in drops on the spiders’ webs that festooned the last red-hot pokers, it was beautiful. Sometimes Ruth wondered if the cold woman, her mother-in-law, didn’t express some secret frustration in these savage reds and yellows, these sullen purples, which she caused to gush out of the warm Cornish earth.
Ruth was grateful now for the lack of outward emotion which had so often chilled her. When Mrs. Vyner asked Adrian, as they walked back to the house, ‘Which day do you go?’ she might have been asking about some weekend visit he was going to make. He said ‘Wednesday’, and she repeated ‘Wednesday’ in a vague voice, her attention wandering to a bough of japonica which the wind had loosened from the wall they were passing. She sat down on the porch to unlace her shocking old gardening boots.
‘I suppose you don’t know where you're going to be sent,’ she said. ‘I know it has to be very secret nowadays, because of the submarines.’
‘I think it’s Syria,’ Adrian said. ‘From the stuffwe’re taking, I’m pretty certain.’
“You can’t be sure,’ Mrs. Vyner said. “There’s a Mrs. Mason who’s come to live at the Cross Glens. You know, Adrian, where old Colonel Fox used to live. Well, Captain Mason went off with a topee and shorts, poor man, and the next thing she heard was that he was sitting up on a fiord in Iceland. It’s all done to put the spies on the wrong track. I'll point Mrs. Mason out to you in church tomorrow.’
Later, when the Rector came in, he made more of an occasion of it than his wife had. He gave Ruth a heartier kiss than usual. ‘It’s good of you to think of the old people when you've got so little time left,’ he said. Ruth disliked the phrase ‘so little time left’. Suddenly she was inordinately conscious of time. The house was full of it, ticking between simpering shepherdesses on the mantelpiece, grumbling out of the tall mahogany case in the hall, nervously stuttering against Adrian’s wrist. The church clock, just across the rectory garden, struck every quarter. Ruth thought, ‘Four days, and one of them nearly gone.’
After dinner the Rector got out The Times atlas and pored over it with Adrian, while Mrs. Vyner sat knitting a sock and talking about the garden and the village. The Rector’s broad thumb, tracing the possible course that a convoy would take out into the Atlantic, swooped down upon the Cape. He and Adrian sounded quiet and contented, as though they were plotting a fishing holiday.
Ruth and her mother-in-law sat knitting a little apart, chatting in low voices.
‘The black spot has been dreadful on the roses this year,’ Mrs. Vyner said. ‘Really dreadful. What do you plan to do after he’s gone?”
‘I shall get a job,’ Ruth said. ‘I thought I might go into one of the services. Shorthand and typing ought to be useful. Anyway, I’m going to do something.’
‘That’s sensible,’ Mrs. Vyner said. ‘After all, you'll be perfectly free, won’t you? It isn’t as though you have any ties.”
‘No, I've got no ties at all,’ Ruth said.
When they were undressing in the big, chilly guest room, she said to Adrian, ‘Somehow, now that you're going I wish we'd had a child. You know, the Sonnets and all that — “And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence, Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.”’
‘I'm not sorry,’ Adrian said. “This way I shan’t be missing anything. When I get back we'll have the fun of kids together.’
“Yes, we will,’ Ruth said, raising her voice slightly, as though she were talking to someone behind him. ‘How long do you think the war’s going to last?’ she asked, picking up her hairbrush.
‘Darling! As though it matters a damn what I think. I don’t know — maybe another couple of years or so.’
‘Some people say it will be over next spring.’
‘Some people talk a hell of a lot of nonsense,’ he said.
The bed was a big, old-fashioned double, its mattress divided into two gentle troughs where successive generations of guests had lain. Ruth got in and pulled the covers up to her chin. She watched Adrian moving around the room. ‘They were an awful long time demobilising people after the last war, weren't they?’ she said. ‘Maybe the firm would make a special application for you, or whatever they do. After all, they'll be terribly anxious to get you back. Mr. Hobday told me himself that he didn’t know how they were going to get on without you.’
‘Oh, they'll manage,’ Adrian said.
At intervals all through the night, Ruth kept waking up and listening to the sea. She pictured it running up the jagged inlets of the long, cruel coast, along which she and Adrian had often sailed in his little boat. He was asleep, breathing softly and lightly, his face close to her shoulder. She lay thinking this way until it began to get light and the birds started shouting in Mrs. Vyner’s wild garden.
They went to church next morning, walking through the gate in the yew hedge into the bleak little churchyard. The congregation that had come to hear the Rector preach was small and badly dressed, for the parish was thinly populated and poor. Itwas easy, without Mrs. Vyner’s whisper, to identify the more prosperous Mrs. Mason, tweedy ina front pew, with a plain little girl on either side. Captain Mason had at least provided her with two defences ’gainst Time’s scythe, hideous though they were in their spectacles and with gold bands round their teeth, before he took himself off to his Icelandic fiords. Ruth looked across the aisle at Mrs. Mason, who was cheerfully singing the Te Deum. ‘I'll get used to it, too,’ she thought. The only other representative of the local gentry in church was Major Collingwood, who read the lessons in a voice beautifully husky with Irish whisky and buttonholed Adrian afterwards in the porch. ‘Well, my boy! Just off, I hear,’ he said. ‘Going East, I suppose? No, no, don’t tell me - mustn’t ask, mustn’t ask. Well, it looks like a big showdown there this winter. Hitler's going to try and break through. Yes, we've got to be prepared for heavy fighting, heavy fighting.’
‘The old fool,’ Ruth thought. She walked away and began reading some of the inscriptions on the crosses of local grey stone at the heads of the few green mounds in the churchyard. Most of the men were fishermen who had been drowned in winter storms along the coast. ‘John Tregarthen, who lost his life off Black Point, 10 December 1897,’ she read. ‘Samuel Cotter, drowned in the wreck of the Lady May, 25 January 1902.”
Adrian came up and took her arm. ‘Hungry?’ he asked. She shook her head, and he saw that there were tears in her eyes. ‘Damn that old idiot!’ he said. ‘Darling, it’s going to be a quiet winter. What do you bet? We'll be stuck in some bloody desert, eating our heads off with boredom. We're going to be forgotten men, forgotten by Hitler, forgotten by the General Staff, forgotten by —
‘It’s all right,’ she said.
Mrs. Vyner came up, fastening her shabby fur round her long, thin neck, and the three of them walked back into the rectory garden.
Next day, Ruth and Adrian went back to London. That night they went out with friends and had plenty to drink. Ruth was able to sleep that night. The next evening, their last, they dined quietly in the flat. She had cooked the things he liked best, but neither of them had much appetite. At last they gave up trying. The one clock in the flat went on sucking time, like an endless string of macaroni, into its bright, vacant face. Every clock in London seemed to crash out the quarters outside their drawn curtains. When the telephone rang as they sat over their coffee, Adrian got up to answer itas though he were glad of the interruption. It turned out to be a man who used to be in love with Ruth and who had been out of England for some time. Adrian had always disliked him, but he sounded very cordial now. Afterwards he said, ‘I’m glad Mike has turned up again. I want you to go out with him. That's why I said to him just now, “When I’m gone I'd take it as a personal favour ifyou’d give Ruth a ring now and then and take her out and give her a good time.”’
‘I don’t want to go out with Mike,’ she said.
‘Please do,’ he said. ‘It will make me feel better to think of you looking pretty, out dancing and enjoying yourself.’
The following morning there was plenty to do— breakfast, a taxi, last-minute things: Meeting at some moment in the bustling, efficient nightmare, Adrian said, ‘I don’t suppose I'll be able to wire you, but I'll give someone a letter to post from the port after we sail,’ and Ruth said, “That will be fine.’ She felt cold and frightened and a little sick, as though this were the morning fixed for a major operation. She wasn’t going to the station, so they said goodbye in the hall, a tiny cupboard built for a man to hang his hat in, for a woman to read a telephone message in — not for heroic partings.
‘Well, take care of yourself,’ Adrian said. ‘Don't forget what we said last night. If the bombings start again, you go down to Cornwall, you go anywhere. Anyway, you get out of here. Promise? Otherwise I won't be able to keep my mind/on this wan.
‘I promise,’ Ruth said, smiling. Language was inadequate, after all. One used the same words for a parting which might be for years, which might end in death, as one did for an overnight business trip. She put her arms tightly round him and said, ‘Good-bye, my love.’
‘Darling,’ he said. ‘I can’t begin to tell you—
‘Don't,’ she said. ‘Don’t.’
The door shut, and presently Ruth heard the taxi driving away. She went back into the living-room, sat down, and looked at the breakfast things. Adrian’s cup was still half full of coffee, a cigarette stubbed out in the wet saucer. The cigarette seemed to have acquired a significance, to be the kind of relic which in another age would have been put carefully away in a little box with the toenail parings of a dead man, the hair clippings of a dead woman.
‘The next two days were bad. Ruth felt that the major operation had come off but that she still had not come round from the anaesthetic. She pottered about the flat, went for a walk, bought some things she wanted, dropped in at a film and a concert. Time now seemed to have receded, to be an enormous empty room which she must furnish, like any other aimless woman, with celluloid shadows of other people’s happiness, with music that worked one up for nothing. An hour or so after Adrian left, she put through a call to Cornwall. ‘Adrian’s gone,’ she said, and across the bad line, across a rival conversation between two men who were trying to arrange a board meeting, she heard her mother-in-law’s calm, tired voice saying, ‘Yes, it’s Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going on Wednesday.’ As she hung up the receiver, she suddenly remembered a French governess out of her childhood who used to rage, weeping with anger, ‘Oh, you British, you British!’ Her friends rang her up with careful, planned kindness. Their stock opening was ‘Has he gone? Oh, you poor darling! But aren’t you terribly relieved it’s over?’ and then they would ask her to a dinner or a theatre. Their manner was caressing but sprightly, as though she were a stretcher case who mustn’t be allowed to know that she was suffering from shock. She slept very badly and had terrible dreams, into which the sea always seemed to come. She went to sleep picturing the blacked-out ship creeping out cautiously into the dark sea. The girl who washed her hair had once told her that her brother had been torpedoed off Norway and that he had been rescued, covered with oil from the explosion. In one of Ruth’s dreams Adrian was struggling in a sea of oil while Mrs. Vyner, watching from her cliff garden, said “Yes, it's Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going to drown on Wednesday.”
On the third day, Ruth woke up feeling different. It was a queer feeling, exhausted but peaceful, as though her temperature had fallen for the first time after days of high fever. The end of something had been reached, the limit of some capacity for suffering. Nothing would be quite as bad again. She thought, ‘After all, there are thousands of women going through what I’m going through and they don’t make a fuss.’ She got up and dressed, with particular care, because she planned to go round to one of the women’s recruiting stations today and find out about a job. It would be important to make a good impression at the first interview. Afterwards she would write a funny letter about it to Adrian, she thought. Although it would probably be months before any mail caught up with him, she would write tonight and tell him not to worry, that she had finished making a fuss and was being sensible, like all the other women in England - like Mrs. Mason, the jolly woman in tweeds singing away at the Te Deum as though there were still something to be thankful about.
She was out all day, and when she put her latchkey in the door she was humming. As she took off her hat, the telephone rang, and she went to it, still humming, and said ‘Hello?’ Adrian’s voice said ‘Darling?’ and her knees went weak. She sat down suddenly, while his voice raced on, sounding excited and a bit blurred, as though he had had two or three drinks. ‘I’m at the station, I'll be right round. Got to the port, but something went wrong. We all waited, then the message came through that it was cancelled. I wasn't allowed to phone you.’
‘Cancelled?’ she said stupidly. ‘You're not going?”
‘Not for another week,’ he said. ‘Maybe ten days. God, what luck. I’m going out to find a taxi. Darling, don’t move until I get there.’
Ruth heard the click as he hung up, and she hung up slowly, too. For a moment she sat quite still. The clock on the table beside her sounded deafening again, beginning to mark off the ten days at the end of which terror was the red light at the end of the tunnel. Then her face became drawn and, putting her hands over it, she burst into tears.