WAR AMONG STRANGERS 17 January 1942
On the day that war broke out between the United States and Japan, Mrs. Bristowe rang up her husband at his Ministry in London. She was at home in Hampshire, and the call took some time to come through. The line was busy, probably with other agitated telephonings, thought Mrs. Bristowe, trying not to pace up and down the room like a caged animal. If only John were here to be soothing and sensible. The night before she had sat by the radio alone, listening to the details of the Japanese attack, taking them in with part of her mind while her thoughts flew in dismay to her two children, Simon and Janet, small and stranded and precious, in California.
Ordinarily the phone was never quiet; now it was mute, its mum blackness suddenly as hostile as an unfriendly face. She began to prowl again, listening abstractedly to Mrs. Prout banging a brush against the staircase banisters out in the hall. Mounted on a terrifying old bicycle, Mrs. Prout sailed up from the village every day to oblige Mrs. Bristowe. With the children not there and John in London all the week, it was easy enough to jog along that way.
The phone rang suddenly, and Mrs. Bristowe’s lunge towards it sent a scatter of books and knitting off the table. As she picked up the receiver, the voice of the Ministry switch- board girl chirped in her ear, and after a pause John’s voice said ‘Hello’.
‘Oh, darling,’ she said, ‘I was afraid you might be at a conference or something.’
‘No, I’m not ata conference. What's the trouble, Barbara?’
Mrs. Bristowe found herself fighting back tears as she said, ‘This awful news!”
‘What? I don’t hear you very well.’
‘Tsaid this awful news,’ Mrs. Bristowe repeated, raising her voice.
“Oh, well, it wasn’t entirely unexpected, was it?”
‘John, I’m so dreadfully worried about the children. I didn’t sleep a wink last night.’
‘I don’t think you need worry,’ he said. ‘I really don’t. From what we know of them, the Maddisons seem thoroughly good, solid people. I’m sure they'll look after the kids all right, whatever happens.’
“But it mayn’t be safe for them to stay with the Maddisons,’ Mrs. Bristowe said. ‘They may evacuate all the children from that area if things look bad. If only there was some way of getting at them!’
‘Well, there isn’t, I’m afraid. We can cable Mrs. Maddison, of course, and ask for news. Cables are going through without much delay,’ he added in his Ministry voice.
Mrs. Bristowe had the peevish sensation that she was listening to a Civil Service pamphlet, one of the bracing kind that was pushed in at the door with the mail and told you to stay put, to keep off the roads during invasion, and to avoid panic and despondency. What she had wanted, ever since that awful moment last evening, was a bosom on which to lean and cry, not a bit of brisk, official buff paper. She said crossly, ‘I suppose Germany’s going to declare war on them next.’
‘It certainly looks like it.’
‘I ought never to have allowed the children to go without Nanny. Never, never! Or I ought to have gone with them myself.’
“Now, darling! You know you didn’t want to leave your job in the W.VS.”
‘Oh, damn the W.VS.!’ she cried, and hung up.
A moment later she regretted it, but by then it was impossible to do anything. Another call, to tell John she was sorry, to receive his amused forgiveness, would make her hopelessly late for the canteen.
She ran upstairs to get her hat and was halted in the bed- room, as though by a blow over the heart, by the photograph of the children on her dressing table. It was the latest snapshot, taken by Mrs. Maddison on Simon's birthday and sent over with a long, careful letter describing his presents, the children who had come to tea, what he had said, what Janet had worn. Certainly, Mrs. Maddison did the thing handsomely ~ regular cables, details of gains in height and weight, school reports, copious snapshots. Now that her children weren't here, Mrs. Bristowe seemed to know far more about them than she ever had before.
She sat down, the photograph in her hand, the canteen forgotten. The children looked very fair and English in the clear American sunlight, Simon in his shorts and jersey, Janet in her smock from Liberty’s. The tears came into Mrs. Bristowe’s eyes again, and refused to be pushed back, as she thought of the last time she had seen her children, that dreadful morning at the port from which they had sailed. They had seemed terribly small then as she stood beside them, making inane remarks to their escort, a jolly Girton girl who looked, thank God, as though she would be good at swimming. The time which elapsed before Mrs. Bristowe got the cable saying that they had arrived safely was the worst torture she had ever known. Torture was really a novelty to her, the placidly contented wife of a permanent Civil Servant, but she had made up for all arrears of suffering in a single bound. Was she going to have to go through all that over again? John had seemed maddeningly smug about the Maddisons, but how could you be certain how people were going to behave in an emergency? Letters and photographs didn’t tell you anything, really. No, thought Mrs. Bristowe wretchedly, she had sent her children into a war among strangers. Kind strangers, but strangers all the same.
The striking of a clock reminded Mrs. Bristowe that they would soon be ringing up from the canteen to find out what had happened to her. She ran downstairs and called to Mrs. Prout, ‘Back for tea. If a cable comes over the telephone, take it down carefully.’ Then she sprinted for the bicycle shed.
Next to her at the canteen that morning, scraping carrots and scrubbing potatoes, was a chatty Mrs. Warner, who immediately cried, ‘Oh, my dear, I've thought so much about you! Aren’t you worried sick about your Simon and Janet, right out there in the middle of it all?’ And another helper said, ‘I was only saying to Dick last night, “Thank goodness we didn’t send Brian and Peter over that time.” Somehow, I always felt one ought to keep them here, even when things looked so bad.’ She sounded pleased with herself, as though conscious of having behaved like a Roman matron while Mrs. Bristowe had ratted on the British Empire. The professional cook, who spoke in a refined voice with pinched vowels to show that she was really a lady and no mistake, sighed, ‘Oh, dear, Ay must say Ay see no end to it now, do you? Ay feel that it will be years and years. Ay do really, Mrs. Bristowe.’ When the school children arrived for lunch, it wasn’t much better. All these shaggy heads, these sturdy little bodies tucking into the soup and dumplings, made Mrs. Bristowe feel terrible. Most of the children were evacuees from Portsmouth, but their mothers could get into a train and come up and see them whenever they wanted. There wasn’t an enormous stretch of water, a continent, and a new war between them.
When Mrs. Bristowe got home and wearily opened the front door, the first thing that she heard was a crash of breaking china. For some reason, this sound meerly the culmination of the day, the final touch to the tale of despair. She went along to the kitchen and found Mrs. Prout on hands and knees, sweeping up the fragments of the afternoon tea tray. ‘Really!’ Mrs. Bristowe said, her voice shaking with unaccustomed anger. ‘I must say I do think this is careless! I'll never be able to match it — never. I suppose you don’t realise how impossible it is to get this sort of thing now? Mr. Bristowe has always been particularly fond of that tea service.’ She did not wait to hear anything that Mrs. Prout might have to say but turned and stalked out of the kitchen, back to the quiet, neat sitting room, where there was no longer danger of taking a header over the children’s litter, back to the telephone which wouldn't ring, the radio which would focus her lonely evening to a pinpoint of terror.
After a while she heard Mrs. Prout coming heavily along the passage, bringing a newly assembled tea tray and wheezing with anxiety as she negotiated the doorpost. Mrs. Prout set the tray down beside Mrs. Bristowe and straightened up, sighing and smoothing her apron. She was a stout woman with steel-rimmed glasses set across a small red button of a nose, which peeped out between glossy red knobs of cheeks.
‘I'm ever so sorry about the tea set, Madam,’ she said. ‘I don't know how I could have been so clumsy, I’m sure. It must be because my mind's not on things on account of thinking about Rose.”
‘Rose?’ said Mrs. Bristowe.
‘Our girl, Rose. The one that went for a nurse to Singapore. The news has given me a turn, as you might say. I don’t trust them yellow monkeys, them Japanese. They won't fight clean, I said to Prout.’
‘Look,’ said Mrs. Bristowe. ‘Go and get another cup and sit down and have a cup of tea with me. It'll do us good.’ Mrs. Prout looked startled, and Mrs. Bristowe had to snap at her ‘Oh, go on, do!’ before she creaked reluctantly out of the room. Those who talk of English class distinctions, thought Mrs. Bristowe in some exasperation, ought to get it quite clear who draws the distinctions.
When Mrs. Prout returned with the cup and saucer, she coughed and murmured ‘Excuse me’ and seated herself on the edge of an armchair. Pouring out the tea, Mrs. Bristowe said, ‘I’m sorry I was cross just now. The truth is I'm worried to death about my children, too. It’s horrid feeling that they’re in the war again, and without me this time.’
‘Tchk!’ Mrs. Prout clicked her tongue sympathetically against her fine, porcelain teeth. ‘Well, Prout says it’s no good worrying. We can’t do anything, he says.’
‘So does Mr. Bristowe.’
‘I didn’t feel easy in my mind when Rose went, but she was all set on it. She looked nice in her uniform, I will say. White. Ever such a bother to keep clean, you'd think, but I suppose there’s not many smuts out there.’
“What I hope is that they don’t come in for any air raids,’ Mrs. Bristowe said. ‘Somehow, the thought of air raids there seems worse than air raids here — 1 don’t know why. Probably because we’re used to them. And Simon would mind. Janet is solid as a rock, but Simon would be frightened.’
‘Ar, poor little dear! Well, our Rose has never been frightened of anything. If she gets hold of any of them Japs, she'll tell them off all right. I can just hear her!’ Mrs. Prout chuckled richly, plastering one knuckly red hand across her mouth.
It began to get dark. They sat on, speaking their thoughts aloud, courteously waiting for each other to finish, returning to their separate thought tracks. A dim comfort had begun to flow from Mrs. Prout to Mrs. Bristowe, the same sort of comfort she remembered in her childhood. Then a thin night-time wail for help had brought an instant, subterranean upheaval from the other bed, the splutter of a match, the apparition of her nurse in a red flannel dressing-gown, with steel-rimmed glasses on a kind, red face like Mrs. Prout’s. Then all of life had been - as one could fool oneself into thinking this moment was — safe firelight, the ticking of a clock telling time that would last forever, the radio not invented, Japan a squiggle on the map, suffering something that happened to grown-ups in books.
Mrs. Prout stirred and sighed. ‘Well, one of these days we'll all have a good laugh thinking of these times. You'll have your little pair back, Mrs. Bristowe, and we'll have our Rose, and Hitler and that nasty snake of an emperor will have the ropes round their necks, as they richly deserve. Until then, as Prout says, there’s nothing to do but get on with it.’ She struggled to her feet. ‘My word, I'll have to do the blackout and pop home, or else Prout will be thinking I’ve met one of them soldiers in a dark lane.”
Presently she put her head round the door. ‘Just off,’ she said. ‘Sure you're all right, Madam?’ she added, to show that the intimacy of the last hour was at an end.
‘Quite all right,’ Mrs. Bristowe said.
Mrs. Prout had not been gone long when the phone rang.
It was John. ‘That you, Barbara? It struck me that I wasn’t as sympathetic as I might have been this morning, darling. Ancaster was in the room and it happened to be — anyway, I’m sorry I was terse.’
‘I'm sorry I hung up on you.’
‘I thought you’d like to know that I’ve sent a long cable to the Maddisons. We ought to hear pretty soon, I should think.’ He gave an awkward cough. ‘Until then, my dear, chin up and keep smiling, won't you?’
Mrs. Bristowe felt that she was being dished out another pamphlet, but she said, ‘I'll try. All we can do is get on with it, I suppose.’
‘Exactly,’ he said in a relieved voice. ‘Just what I said this morning. Well, darling, I'll try to get down midweek if the old boy isn’t tiresome. Ring me if the Maddisons’ answer comes before then, won't you?
When she had hung up the receiver the clock was striking six. She went over to the radio, turned the knob, and sat down with all the other anxious women to knit and listen.
COMBINED OPERATIONS 29 August 1942
Gregory Parsons opened the gate of his Oxfordshire cottage and trod delicately up the path between the clipped lavender hedges. It was a beautiful summer evening and he looked warm and a trifle dusty in his dark town clothes. He had taken off his black Homburg hat as he walked from the station, and carried it in his hand, together with the evening paper anda large government briefcase. At the door he paused, then cautiously lifted the latch and entered his home as though proposing to make off with the silver.
His wife, Laura, wearing a red-and-white striped blouse and dark-blue slacks, came into the dark little flagstoned hall, carrying a bowl of raspberries. ‘You needn't worry,’ she said. ‘They're down at the pub.’
‘Thank God for that!’ said Gregory. He dropped his hat, newspaper, and briefcase in a heap on the floor and took off his coat, making a not very successful shot with it in the direction of a chair. Then he followed her into the kitchen, where she was filling a row of bottling jars with the raspberries.
‘Well?’ he said. ‘How did they take it?’
‘Perfectly all right,’ she said. ‘They didn’t even seem surprised.’ “When are they —”
“The day after tomorrow. Roger says he’s due for a week's leave anyway, and they think they'll go off to Wales and fish. Then they’re going to try and get the Murdochs to lend them their studio for a bit.’
“Trust Roger to try and get something on the cheap. ‘Thursday! My God, I can hardly believe it.’ Gregory stretched out his arms luxuriously, and a look of utter peace came over his nervous, sallow face. ‘I couldn't keep my mind on anything today. There was a conference this afternoon, rather an important one. All through it I kept on thinking, what the hell shall we do if they dig their toes in and say they won’t go?’
“It was easy, really,’ Laura said, snapping rubber rings carefully round the bottles. ‘I broke it to Madeline this morning when at last she condescended to get herself out of bed and come downstairs. She was scratching round here making herself some coffee when I did it. I said, “Oh, Mad, Gregory and I feel like beasts, but we've got to ask you and Roger to turn out. Gregory’s sister Penelope and her children are coming over from Ireland, and they haven't got another place to go except us.”
‘It sounds a bit fishy,’ said Gregory. ‘They know Penelope and I can’t stand the sight of each other. However, I expect you put it over all right. What did she say?”
‘She said, “Of course, my dear, That was in the arrange- ment when we came here. You promised to let us know when anything like that turned up.” All very reasonable, I must say. It made me feel rather dreadful. Then, when Roger got back this evening, she sidetracked him upstairs and told him. I heard their voices for ages when I was picking the raspberries. Then they came down, and Roger said about Wales and the Murdochs’ studio, and they went off to the pub.”
‘Leaving you picking the raspberries, said Gregory bitterly. ‘Of course. If that bitch had ever done a hand's turn around here to help you, things might have been very different.’
‘Oh, I'd really rather do it,’ said Laura. ‘You know the fuss. Besides, they're not going to eat these raspberries, are they?’
‘No, by God, they're not,’ said Gregory cheerfully. ‘Now that they're going —’ He stopped and repeated the words, as though he were rolling them on the tongue like some rare old vintage. ‘Now that they're going, it’s amusing to try and decide what got us down worst. Do you know, with me I think it’s Roger’s habit of handing me the vegetables at meals. Handing them to me as though I were a guest in my own house, mark you.’
‘The way Mad leaves the bathroom!’ said Laura. ‘It certainly will be nice to go in and not find clouds of powder over the glass, everything swimming in water, and the lavatory jammed with face tissues.’
‘It will also be pleasant to turn the radio to the programme we want for a change,’ said Gregory.
He got up and went out into the hall. Picking up his briefcase, he waved it at Laura and said, ‘I've got two bars ‘of chocolate in here = that little shop off the Strand had some in today.’
‘Darling, how lovely! We'll eat it when we go to bed.’
‘Soon we'll be able to eat it when and where we like,’ said Gregory. ‘Well, I’m going to change. You know, it’s indescribable how different the house feels when they're out of it.’ Trolling Figaro unmusically but happily, he climbed the rickety stairs to their bedroom. There he got out of his London clothes, letting them lie where they dropped, and put on a loud coloured shirt and a pair of dirty grey flannel trousers. Then he went downstairs and out into the garden, where he fetched a hoe from the lean-to shed and ambled off to the vegetable plot.
Gregory began hoeing the bind-weed among the carrot rows, enjoying the small, muscular effort after the long day of sitting at his desk and in the hot, crowded train. The carrots were looking fine. ‘Next year,’ Roger had said the other day, ‘we must find room for more carrots and cut out the turnips. Neither Mad nor I like turnips.’ Like his damned nerve, thought Gregory, without bitterness. The time for bitter- ness was over and past. This was the weak and delicious period of convalescence, when it was pleasant to lie back and think dreamily how much had been endured. Now that the temperature was down, it was possible for the first time to analyse coolly, and thatin itself was a luxury. Since the Butlers had moved into Willow Cottage, Gregory couldn't remember feeling cool and analytical once. Yet it had seemed such an admirable arrangement at the start. He and Laura had always got on splendidly with Roger and Madeline. They had dined with each other regularly, and Roger and Gregory worked in the same Ministry. Gregory had even felt faintly and agreeably attracted by Madeline, who was blonde and pretty as a bad picture, without the bother of ever having to do anything about it. When the Butlers’ flat was blitzed, there- fore, it seemed a fine idea that they should move out into the country with the Parsons. Gregory couldn't put his finger right on the moment when it had stopped being a fine idea and become hell. Neither could he point triumphantly to any big contributing cause. If anyone had asked him, he would have had to say, ‘Well, it’s partly the way Roger begins every other sentence with “In point of fact”, and Mad talks brightly at breakfast, and Roger is always in the lavatory when I go there, and he gets our bottles of gin mixed, and Mad rings up friends of hers in Cheshire or somewhere and forgets to pay for the calls.’ Half the time it wasn’t even as definite as that. It was a laugh, a way Mad had of sitting, a glance exchanged between her and Roger, which was sufficient to set Gregory’s teeth on edge. Maybe he had exaggerated some of it now and then. For instance, in this mood of splendid, almost lightheaded detachment which had come over him as he hoed the carrot rows, he knew that quite possibly Madeline hadn't eaten his butter ration a few days before. Yet he could remember how, at the time, the pat had definitely looked smaller to him than when he had seen it last, and how he had confided to Laura in bed that night that he was positive that Madeline had helped herself from it for the sandwich she had suddenly felt like making the night before. He had shaken with anger, thinking of his butter disappearing into that wide, peasant mouth, which had once seemed to him aimlessly desirable. Rather idiotic, sordid little emotions they seemed now. He and Laura had never been able to talk freely except in bed. Willow Cottage wasn’t like a large house, where you could get away easily from other people. It was old, too, and sounds bounced through the leaks in its beams and wattle-and-daub walls. As they lay with the covers drawn up to their chins and talked in furious low voices, they could hear the Butlers murmuring away in the next room like furtive doves under their eaves.
Roger and Madeline walked up the path between the lavender to Willow Cottage. They were arm in arm and feeling very affectionate and happy, for they had been celebrating down at the Bull. Suddenly it had seemed an occasion for celebration, and they had stayed on and on in the stuffy little bar, with its darts board and picture of Queen Victoria as a girl. ‘In point of fact,’ Roger had said as he brought over their third pint, ‘poor Laura’s nothing but an Andromeda of the sink, with no Perseus in sight. A certain amount of household toil is inevitable in these days, but is it necessary to make quite such a tiresomely conspicuous sacrifice of oneself?’ They had decided that it wasn’t and that Thursday would be a merciful deliverance all round. When they went into the cottage the first thing they saw was Gregory’s hat, newspaper, and coat lying on the floor. Roger nodded at them. “Typical Gregory,’ he said in a low voice. ‘Just as we were saying. Charming when you don’t have to live with it, no doubt.’ He picked up the hat and put it carefully on the table just as Laura came out of the kitchen and said, “There you are, you two.’
“Yes, here we are,’ said Madeline. She and Roger exchanged a slight smile. Sitting at Queen Victoria’s feet, they had found out that Laura’s habit of stating the obvious was one of the things that made them both want to scream.
Supper was an amiable meal, at which the approaching departure was mentioned lightly by both couples. Roger said that being in London again would have its advantages. ‘In point of fact, the train journey is a bit of a sweat,’ he said, getting up and handing Gregory the dish of peas. “Thanks, Roger,’ said Gregory mildly, helping himself. After supper they went into the living-room, and Roger fiddled with the radio until he found a programme of swing. Ordinarily Gregory detested swing music, but tonight he wagged his foot and hummed.
‘I suppose you'll want old Carter and his taxi to take your stuff to the station on Thursday,’ he said.
“I suppose so,’ said Roger.
Gregory hummed some more. He and Laura went to bed early. They sat up in bed, reading and eating the two bars of chocolate with private, deliberate greed. They could hear the Butlers in the next room, talking in low voices, Roger cleaning his teeth and gargling, and the scratchy sound of Madeline brushing out her thick, fair hair.
Any one of these noises would have been calculated, twenty-four hours before, to make Gregory irritable, but now he listened dreamily. It was nice to think of Madeline brushing her light hair in the candlelight. The silly creature had nearly set the thatch on fire one night a few weeks back, but he thought of that incident only momentarily. He was thinking of her sunburnt arms raised as she brushed, pulling taut the lines of that really delectable bosom. ‘I hope it will come off all right Thursday,’ he said.
“It will come off all right,’ said Laura comfortably. ‘Don’t you worry.’ She shut up her book and snuggled down beside him.
Gregory blew out the candle and lay down, too. He felt very happy. Already he could look ahead with anticipation to the time when he would again feel that particular need which the Butlers had always filled so satisfyingly, when he would pick up the telephone and say ‘Roger? Look, what are you and Mad doing tonight?’
GOOD EVENING, MRS. CRAVEN 5 December 1942
For years now they had been going to Porter's, in one of the little side streets off the Strand. They had their own particular table in the far corner of the upstairs room, cosily near the fire in winter, cooled in summer by a window at their backs, through which drifted soot and the remote bumble of traffic. Everything contemporary seemed remote at Porter’s. The whole place looked as though it had been soaked in Madeira the rich brown walls crowded with signed photographs of Irving and Bancroft and Forbes-Robertson, the plush seats, the fly-spotted marble Muses forever turning their classic noses hopefully towards the door, as though expecting to see Ellen Terry come in. The waiters were all very old. They carried enormous napkins over their arms and produced the menu with a special flourish from the tails of their old-fashioned coats. The waiter who attended to the corner table looked as though he could have walked on as a senator in a Lyceum production of Julius Caesar. Leaning protectively over them, he would say in a hoarse, fruity voice, into which Madeira seemed to have seeped too, ‘The steak-and-kidney pudding is just as you like it today, Mr. Craven.’
Every Thursday evening, wet or fine, they would be dining in their corner under the bust of Mrs. Siddons, talking quietly, sometimes holding hands under the tablecloth. It was the evening when he was supposed to have a standing engage- ment to play bridge at his club. Sometimes he called for her at her flat; more often they arrived separately. Out of all their Thursdays she loved the foggy winter evenings best, when the taxi-driver growled, “Wot a night!’ as she fumbled in her purse for change, when she ran coughing up the stairs into the plushy warmth and light and their waiter greeted her with a ‘Good evening, Mrs. Craven. Mr. Craven's waiting at your table. I’ll bring along your sherries right away.”
She would go over to their table, sit down, and slide her hand palm upwards along the sofa seat until his hand closed round it.
‘Good evening, Mrs. Craven,’ he would say, and they would both laugh.
They always enjoyed the joke that the waiter supposed they were married. It went with the respectability of Porter's that any nice couple who dined together continuously over a long period of time should be thought of as husband and wife. ‘We're one in the sight of God and Mrs. Siddons,’ he said, but although she laughed, it wasn’t a joke with her. She liked being called Mrs. Craven. It gave her a warm feeling round the heart, because she could pretend for a moment that things were different and that he had no wife and three fine children who would be broken in bits by a divorce. He had long ago made her see the sense of this, and now she was careful never to make scenes or to sound the demanding note which he hated. Her value for him was to be always there, calm and understanding: ‘You smooth me out,’ he said some times. ‘You give me more peace than anyone in the world.’ She was a wonderful listener. She would sit watching him with a little smile while he told her all the details of his week. He often talked about the children. At her flat, standing in front of the mirror tying his tie, he would tell her proudly how clever eight-year-old Jennifer was, or how well Pete was coming on at school. On these occasions the little smile sometimes grew a trifle rigid on her lips.
They never went anywhere but Porter’s. In a queer sort of way, although he was known by name, he seemed to feel safe and anonymous there. ‘None of the people one knows comes here,’ he said, by which he meant none of the people his wife knew. More men than women ate at Porter's. Very occasionally he was greeted by a business acquaintance, who would nod and call across the room, ‘How are you?’ Then he would call back heartily, ‘Fine! How are you?’ but he would be a little uncomfortable all through the meal. If she slid her hand towards his knee, he would pretend not to notice, and he would talk in a brisk, cheerful way which, at a distance, might look like the kind of manner one would use when dining with a female cousin up from the country or a secretary one had kept working late and taken along for some food out of sheer good nature.
Sometimes she felt that she would like to put on a low-cut gown and go somewhere where there were lights and dancing, where she could walk in proudly, with him following her without taking a swift, surreptitious look round the room first to see who was there. But she knew how worried he would look if she suggested it, how he would say, ‘Darling, I wish we could, but you know it’s impossible. Someone would be sure to spot us, We've got to be careful — haven't we?’ By now she had learned exactly how to dress for their Thursday evenings. The clothes had to make her look beautiful for him, but they must be on the unadventurous side so that no one would cast an interested remembering glance from an opposite table. She often wore brown, and sometimes she had a funny feeling that she was invisible against the brown wall and the faded prints of the Prince of Denmark and the noblest Roman of them all.
When the war came, he got a commission in a mechanised regiment. Their Thursday evenings were interrupted, and when he got home on leave things were often difficult. There was a family dinner party, or the children were back from school. ‘You know how it is, darling,’ he would say ruefully on the telephone. But every now and then he sent her a telegram and came dashing up to London for a few hours. Porter's still looked the same except that most of the men were in uniform, and the old waiter always saw to it that they got their usual table. ‘Good evening, Mrs. Craven,’ he would say shambling forward when he saw her. ‘You're expecting Mr. Craven? .. . Ah, that’s fine. The pigeon casserole is just how he likes it today.”
They dined together just before he went to Libya. There were two men drinking port at the next table, one with white hair and beautiful, long hands who looked like a Galsworthy family lawyer, the other round and red.
‘Don’t think I’m being stupid and morbid,’ she said, ‘but supposing anything happens. I’ve been worrying about that. You might be wounded or ill and I wouldn’t know.’ She tried to laugh. “The War Office doesn’t have a service for sending telegrams to mistresses, does it?’
He frowned, because this sounded hysterical, and glanced sharply at the old men at the next table, who went right on drinking port and talking in their tired old voices.
‘Darling,’ he said, ‘don’t start getting ideas like that into your head. If anything did happen — but it won't - I'd get someone to let you know right away.’
She had a wild impulse to ask him how this would be possible when he would be lying broken and bloody, alone in the sand. With an effort, she remembered that he loved her because she was calm, because she was not the kind of woman to make scenes or let the tears run down her face in public.
‘I know you would,’ she said. ‘Don’t worry about me. Remember, dearest, you don’t have to worry about me one little bit.’
‘Good night, Mrs. Craven. Good night, Mr. Craven,’ said the old waiter, hurrying after them as they went out.
Along time after he left, his letters began to arrive. They were not very satisfactory. He wrote in the same hearty style that he put on at Porter's for the business acquaintances’ benefit, and she had the feeling he was worried the censor might turn out to be his wife’s second cousin. She worked hard at a war job and lost a lot of weight. The girl who washed her hair said, ‘My goodness, aren't you getting grey!’ and she longed foolishly to be able to tell her about it and get her sympathy. There was no one to confide in; all these years she had been so careful that she had hardly mentioned his name to anyone else. She went out with other people, but she imagined that she wasn’t so amusing or attractive as she used to be and that they noticed it. She began to stay home most evenings, reading in bed or writing him long letters. Before he left, they had settled on various little code words which would give her an idea of where he was, so she was able to tell when he was up in the front lines or when he had gone back to Cairo for leave.
After a while his letters stopped, but she wasn’t seriously worried at first. She knew that the mails were often bad; there had been long gaps before. But this time hard fighting was going on in Libya, and she had a terrible premonition that something had happened. She found that she could hardly sleep at all, and when she came home in the evenings, her hand shook as she put the key in the door. She made herself take the letters out of the box and look through them very slowly. Afterwards she would go into the living-room, sit down, and stare blankly out of the window at the barrage balloons glittering in the late sunlight.
One evening she came in after a hard day’s work, and as she stood getting the key out of her purse, she knew that there would be a letter or a cable waiting for her. She was so positive of it that she was tremulous with relief as she got the door open and stooped to the mailbox. There was nothing except a bill for a repair to the radio set. She stood, feeling cold and stupid, then she went swiftly to the living-room telephone and looked up a number in the book. As she dialled it and then listened to the bell buzzing, it seemed odd to her to think how many times he must have heard it ring through that unknown house.
When a child's voice, high, and carefully a little overloud, answered, she was slightly taken aback. She said, ‘Is this Mrs. Craven’s house?’ The child’s voice said, “Yes. This is Jennifer. Do you want Mummy? .. . I'll get her.’
After a pause she heard footsteps on a hardwood floor, and then a new voice said, “Hello? Yes?’
She had thought out what to say, and she made her voice crisp and friendly.
‘Good evening, Mrs. Craven,’ she said. ‘I do want to apologise for troubling you like this. You won't know my name, but I’m an old friend of Mr. Craven's, and I’ve only just heard that he’s in Libya. I thought I'd like to ring up and see if you’ve had good news of him.’
“Why, that’s nice of you,’ Mrs. Craven said pleasantly. ‘To tell you the truth, I've heard nothing very recently, but I try not to worry, He'll cable me when he has a minute. Judging by the papers, I shouldn't think any of them have a minute.”
‘No, I don’t suppose they have,’ she said. She could hear the little girl calling out, as if to a dog. She knew that there were two dogs, and that there was French Empire furniture in the room, and on the mantelpiece stood a little Chinese figure in white porcelain with a scroll in its hand. She had helped choose it one Christmas. Mrs. Craven sounded calm and unfussed. She could picture her standing at the telephone, smiling slightly, secure in the middle of her own familiar things, maybe watching the child abstractedly out of the corner of her eye while she dealt courteously with this well-meaning stranger.
The pleasant voice said, ‘Luckily, I’m tremendously busy myself. That helps to keep one’s mind off things, doesn’t it? I'm so sorry, I don’t think I quite caught the name.’
She mumbled a name that might have been anything and added lightly, ‘Just someone Mr. Craven used to know along while ago. Goodbye, Mrs. Craven, and thanks so much. I hope you hear good news very soon.’
She hung up the receiver and sat for a long time without moving. Then she began to weep bitterly. The tears poured down her face, and she rocked her body backward and forward. ‘I can’t go on,’ she sobbed, as though he were there in the room with her. ‘I can’t, can’t go on. You'll have to break them up —I don't care. I just can’t go on this way any longer.’ She thought of his wife sitting in their home on the other side of town, and the contrast seemed too bitter to bear. All those years of Thursday evenings seemed like a pathetic game of make-believe — two children playing at housekeeping in a playhouse with three walls. After a while she grew quieter. She sat thinking of him, wondering whether, wherever he was, he would have had a sense of something breaking sharply in two, coming apart with a hum, like a snapped wire. Already she could feel the relaxed tension, as though whatever had been holding her taut all these years had suddenly gone limp.
‘Tomorrow she would write and tell him, but not now. She couldn’t remember when she had felt so tired. She went into the bathroom to bathe her face, and then came back and began taking off her dress. There was a brooch pinned at the neck, and she undid it and stood looking at it for a moment. It was a discreetly beautiful thing of dark, old garnets — diamonds, he had pointed out, were too likely to cause comment, and didn’t suit her, either. She put down the brooch and finished undressing. Maybe, she thought, she would wait until after tomorrow to write to him, for she had a feeling that tomorrow there would be a letter from him. She was sure of it. She could see it lying in the mailbox, addressed in that small, neat, familiar hand. If it wasn’t there tomorrow, it would be there the next day. She would go to Porter's for dinner, sit at their table, and read it over and over. ‘Good news from Mr. Craven, Mrs. Craven?’ the old waiter would say as he leaned protectively over her. ‘Ah, that’s fine, that’s fine.’
She began to smile, but suddenly she closed her eyes for a minute. She had had a queer sensation of falling, of the room slipping away and of herself falling, falling, as one does in a dream, without being able to stop and without wondering or caring what lies at the bottom.