THE HUNGER OF MISS BURTON 16th January 1943
Ever since food began to getva bit tight, Miss Burton had carried a wolf around with her under the neat waistband of her tweed skirt. Sometimes she felt that it wasn’t one wolf only. It was a whole wolf pack cutting up in the vacuum at the back of her grey herringbone. Before the war, she couldn't remember thinking much about food, but now she thought about it constantly. She thought of thick steaks sitting on beds of fried onions, of cakes topped with a Mont Blanc of whipped cream, of black cherry jam on hot, flaky croissants. Now and then she even dreamed about them, as in the old days she used to dream about love. No more erotic visions of unknown or (even more embarrassing) known males flitted disturbingly through Miss Burton’s slumbers. Instead, they were punctuated with good blowouts of dream food which never had any taste, which melted tantalisingly into the slow return of the chilly room and the school bell clamorously ringing.
Miss Burton's wolves were at their worst in the middle of the morning, just before break. Then they leaped about play- fully, producing awkward rumbling noises which must, she often felt, be audible to Mr. Duval, romping through ‘falloir’ with the Second Form next door. Sometimes she glanced sharply at the boys, expecting to catch them grinning. But they were too preoccupied with their own hunger, poor little devils, counting the moments until their eleven o'clock glass of milk and a biscuit. The staff let up also for cups of tea in the staff room — old Blenkinsop, little bald Kendall, Duval with his stiffleg. All the young masters had gone by now; there was no one to flirt with, even if one felt inclined. Miss Burton seldom felt inclined any longer. Probably food was at the back of that, too; sex impulses don’t flourish on a meagre diet. Her one glorious flutter, the affair with Emil that walking summer holiday in the Black Forest, had been done on rich, stupefying food — garlic sausage, pig’s knuckle and buttery cabbage, enormous draughts of beer. Emil was dead now, his country was at war with hers, that innocent Germany had vanished like a dream into the forest. Lately she hadn't even bothered to have the grey in her hair touched up toa dark, unreal-looking auburn.
When she went along to the staff room one Saturday morning towards the end of the autumn term, she found Kendall and the others already there, standing warming their hands round their cups of tea as though they were holding small individual braziers. They were being economical on the central heating this year, and in the staff-room grate smouldered a few dejected logs to which Mrs. Baker, the headmaster’s wife, always referred as ‘a jolly wood fire’. When. Miss Burton came in, Kendall was puffing at it unhopefully with the bellows, and Margaret Pierce, the music mistress, was saying, ‘I’m famished as well as frozen. Breakfast this morning was really too ludicrous — some of the mothers are going to start complaining before you can say knife.’ Miss Burton poured herself a cup of tea and gulped the hot liquid gratefully, feeling it cut the classroom chill in her insides. ‘It’s something about this wartime food,’ she said. ‘I eat and eat bread, but I get up feeling that I haven't had anything.’ ‘Well, thank God I haven’t got much more of it,’ said Margaret. She was leaving at the end of the term to marry a Canadian soldier named Jay Sturges, whom she had met at a local dance. Miss Burton stared at her, standing warming her long, slender legs in front of Mrs. Baker’s jolly wood fire, and snapped, ‘If I were ten years younger, my child, you wouldn't catch me stopping here one moment longer than was necessary, either.” Margaret just yawned and nodded unbelievingly, hitching her skirt a little higher at the back so that Kendall had a good view of the silk stockings Jay had given her. ‘How long till lunch, oh Lord, how long?’ she sighed as Miss Burton picked up her books and went out.
When the morning eventually ended and the lunch for which Margaret had prayed arrived, it turned out to be of the variety which looks ample but soon subsides, leaving a vacuum. Miss Burton, who presided over one of the tables, wondered how many more ways Miss Ruddock, the hard- pressed cook, would think up of disguising vegetables as something else. And pulse! Really, with the amount of pulse that was stuffed into the boys, the poor little wretches’ insides must be blown out with enough wind to start an Atlantic gale. It was a temptation to give herself a slightly larger helping of the hot treacle roly-poly — after all, the boys had mothers who sent them things, potted meat and jam; Morley, the urchin on her right, had had a cake as big as his head this week — but she was scrupulously fair down to the last crumb.
As she began to eat, careful not to bolt the delicious sweet stuff for which she was pining, she remembered thankfully that it was Saturday and her turn to be off duty. Usually she went into the town with Margaret Pierce or Miss Ruddock, and they shopped and went to a film. It wasn’t particularly exciting, but there was a bogus Elizabethan café in the High Street where they served hot chocolate and really nice homemade scones. Miss Burton enjoyed sitting in a corner under the orange-shaded wrought-iron candelabra, glancing through an old Tatler and feeling the warmth of the shopping women at the tables all round her, with their flushed, homely faces and their baskets full of food. It was something, at any rate, to get away from St. Ermin’s for an hour or two.
But Margaret, buttonholed as they were all pouring out of the dining-room, shook her head.
‘Sorry, Burty,’ she said, ‘I can’t manage a flick today. I've got a date.’
‘I suppose it’s Jay,’ said Miss Burton.
‘We're going to a dance at the Red Lion this evening. See you on the bus, though.”
As they trundled towards the market town later that afternoon, separated by countrywomen with bundles and soldiers with rifles and packs, Miss Burton glanced at Margaret across the bus and reflected grudgingly that she was looking nice. She was wearing her good blue coat, and the scarf twisted round her red hair brought out the colour of her eyes. Although she wasn’t a type which would have appealed to Emil - Emil had liked women to be cosily built — most men would think her attractive. It was obvious that some man, Jay Sturges or another, would want to take her away from pounding out Czerny’s Piano Exercises with stupid kids who hadn't a spark of music in their souls. As always on the days when she was meeting Jay, she had a bright, happy expression of anticipation, different from the fretful look she wore all week at St. Ermin’s. Miss Burton had a sudden horrid pang of envy, an empty, dropping sensation worse than anything experienced in those moments when her wolves were clamouring.
“Well, have a good time,’ she said when the bus rattled into the market place and they all got out.
‘Be good!’ Margaret called gaily, and hurried off through the crowd.
More leisurely, Miss Burton progressed up the packed High Street, with stops at some of the shop windows, in which she saw herself reflected, portrait of a gentlewoman in grey herringbone with a party of wolves under the third button. As she suspected, lunch had subsided and she was ravening again, but there was a little time to be filled in before she could decently make tracks for Ye Olde Tudor Café. She entered a sweetshop and bought her week’s ration of chocolate. At least, it was better now that it was rationed. You could be sure of getting it, and not have some hateful, pert girl snap, ‘Any children? We keep it for the children now,’ with her hand resting beside the pile of little twopenny bars and her impudent, mocking eyes searching Miss Burton’s face as though expecting to see marriage lines there in electric lights. Coming out, she was halted by the sight of a mound of freshly boiled lobsters in the fishmonger’s. One holiday before the war, the parents of one of the boys, wealthy people named Douglas, had asked her out to lunch in London, and they had had lobster salad at Scott’s — an ambrosial lobster with thick mayonnaise, followed by raspberries and cream, coffee, and a Cointreau that sent Miss Burton walking on air out into Piccadilly, telling Mr. Douglas that his son was the sort of boy who every once ina while made the teaching profession seem worth while. He had been charming, she remembered. Well, she had still taken trouble over how she looked in those days, before she became merely a disembodied stomach with a menagerie prowling about in it. Now, nothing seemed important any more compared with the small, private sensuality of eating.
The memory had made her mouth water, and she crossed the road quickly to the orange-shaded warmth of Ye Olde Tudor Café. She sat there for an hour or more, spinning out her order of hot chocolate and scones, glancing ironically at the pictures of well-fed people in the Tatler. ‘The Lady Marigold Taggart-Bly leads an austere life at her cottage in the country.’ A week at St. Ermin’s, my girl, and you’d know all about austerity. Soldiers and their girls came in, the men clumping a bit self-consciously, the girls with rosy, shining faces under their pert hats. Miss Burton wondered suddenly what Margaret and Jay were doing. She asked for a second order of scones, and ate them to the last crumb with deliberate, enjoyable greed.
At the cinema, she saw the feature picture through and then sat on for a bit of the beginning again. It was comfortably warm in there, and the star was a big, fair fellow who reminded her of Emil. If he were alive now, he would be forty-eight and her enemy, but she saw him always as a young man of twenty-seven, wearing a comic green hat and leather pants and looking as beautiful as a god. All round her, couples were nuzzling and making unabashed love as they watched the picture. Maybe Margaret was there, sitting happily in the darkness, feeling a man’s cheek against her hair as she pretended to watch that nonsense on the screen. Miss Burton felt tired and depressed all at once, and suspected that she had a headache coming.
She was early for the bus, after all. She sat in the little shelter, squeezed up on a bench next to a stout woman and her tired, wailing children. The winter evening was still and beautiful, and there was a wonderful full moon. Miss Burton was wondering what there would be for supper — on Saturday evenings Miss Ruddock sometimes spread herself a little — and debating whether she should open her packet of chocolate or not, when she saw Margaret and Jay on the opposite side of the market place. She was surprised, for Margaret had said that she was coming home on the last bus, and she watched them curiously as they walked up and down in the moonlight. Jay was very tall; she would have known him anywhere by his height. He and Margaret stopped, still talking. Then they went on again, but a few yards further on they stopped for the second time, and suddenly Jay turned on his heel and walked off, and Margaret came hurrying over to the shelter.
‘Halloa!’ said Miss Burton. ‘I thought you and Jay were going to make a night of it.’
“We changed our minds,’ said Margaret shortly.
Before Miss Burton could say any more, the bus came in and they had to scramble for seats. It was dark inside the bus, the lights were partly blacked over, and everyone's face looked greenish and ghostly. Miss Burton decided against opening the chocolate now, for it would be difficult to avoid offering Margaret a piece.
‘Did you go to the cinema?’ she asked.
Margaret didn’t answer, and Miss Burton, with a little shock, realised that she was crying. She was sitting, swaying with the movement of the bus, and the tears were running down her face and dropping on the blue coat. Miss Burton thought, “They've quarrelled, he’s let her down,’ and through her mind flashed the idea that they might have broken the engagement. The chocolate slid off her lap, and she bent mechanically to pick it up. She didn’t feel like opening it, now. The Olde Tudor tea must have been more filling than she realised, for she felt a sense of utter, wonderful repletion, as though she had just had a satisfying meal that would last along time.
“Two to the St. Ermin’s gates,’ she said to the bus conductress, in such a strong, buoyant tone that the other people turned their greenish faces towards her in dim astonishment.
IT’S THE REACTION 24 July 1943
Miss Catherine Birch trotted through the lobby of the ministry where she was employed, automatically waved her pass at the doorman, and joined the hurrying throng of men and women pouring down the London street towards the bus stops and tube stations. Their haste was contagious. She began to scurry along as though a vitally important evening lay before her. Most of the other female employees of the ministry were girls with hatless manes of long, glossy hair hanging round their shoulders or setted up in red or blue snoods. The evening was warm, and they raced along bare-legged in their flimsy sandals, their bright, cheap coats hanging open. In contrast, Miss Birch seemed to be wearing a great many clothes. Her tailored suit, felt hat, Liberty-silk scarf, stockings, gloves, chubby, rolled umbrella, briefcase, and sensible morocco-grained leather bag gave her something of the appearance of a schoolmistress bringing up the rear of a double column of dryads.
In the tube, the ministry faces thinned out and merged with greater London. Miss Birch stood in the packed train r-morocco purse pressed against the bosom of a stout matron in slacks, while her hatbrim brushed the cheek of a young American soldier who was despairingly studying the map of stations over their heads. Her mind went on fretting over that morning’s row in the department. She didn’t really know how it had happened. She had felt tired and out of sorts, someone’s stupid inaccuracy had inflamed her, and the next thing she knew, she was having it out with Mr. Danvers. After the row was over, her hands shook and her voice was weak and quavery. She went to the women’s washroom before lunch, wishing that she could lock herself in and have a good howl. Nan Cruddock, from the department, was there, powdering her nose and drawing a modish square mouth over the Victorian bow with which nature had afflicted her. ‘Know what I think, Birch?’ Nan had said kindly as she leaned towards the mirror, while alongside her Miss Birch dabbed her cheeks with a leaf torn from a little book of papier poudre. ‘Know what? It’s about time you had some leave. Ask Danvers for some, go off down to the country and find a cow to look at, and for God’s sake relax. If you don’t, you’re for the ministry heebie-jeebies — in plain English, darling, a breakdown. Heavens, I must fly!’ And she had rushed off to lunch with the usual mob of people. She was a good-hearted creature, though, in spite of her flightiness, and there might even be some common sense in what she said, Miss Birch had reflected later over her solitary sandwich in the canteen. Maybe things had been working up to the morning’s flare-up for quite a while.
The train filled and emptied, the American boy got out, and Miss Birch leaned against other bosoms before she got to her own station. It was ten minutes’ walk from there to Richelieu House, the block of flats where she lived. Three or four of the neighbourhood shops were still open; this district resembled a village, flowing on in its muddled eighteenth- century way round the twentieth-century blocks of steel and concrete which had grown up in it. Miss Birch called in at the little tobacconist-newsagent on the corner by the public house and bought some cigarettes. The woman behind the counter said, ‘I’ve got your Player’s this evening, but only loose — no packets. Will that do?”
Miss Birch said that it would. Tucking the chubby umbrella under one arm and digging down for change, she had a sudden sociable impulse to start up a little conversation, to say something which would keep her standing there in the shop, sniffing the smell of frying that was coming out of the back room. She said in a friendly voice, ‘My goodness, how your plant has grown! It’s really a beauty now,’ nodding towards a potted cactus which stood on a table next to a sleeping ginger cat. The woman glanced at it and said, ‘Yes, it’s doing well, isn’t it?’ Miss Birch picked up her handful of cigarettes and went out. The impulse hadn’t come to any- thing after all. If it had been Nan Cruddock, now, she knew perfectly well that with half a dozen words Nan would have leaned over the counter and dragged that woman into her life. With a roll of those round blue eyes, she would have built up something warm and friendly in no time. It was years now that Miss Birch had been calling in for her cigarettes and never getting much beyond a ‘good evening’. Never, that is, except when the blitz was on and everything was different.
Miss Birch went on thinking about the blitz as she walked to her own block and went up in the lift with a Mr. Masters, who lived on the same floor.
‘Evening,’ he said pleasantly. ‘Having a lovely bit of weather, aren't we?’
‘Lovely,’ said Miss Birch.
Mr. Masters let himself into his flat which was close to the lift, and Miss Birch walked on down the passage, fumbling for her key. Behind the little black doors she could hear people talking on the telephone, playing their radios, running their bath water. No doubt all the other tenants on Floor K could hear, if they chose to listen, her footsteps ringing out now down the passageway. When she left, early in the morning, milk bottles stood outside the doors with newspapers folded on top of them. The neat, sealed bottles were like footprints discovered on the floor of an ancient cliff city, a sign that life existed somewhere in this echoing honeycomb. Except for the laughter behind the black doors and the occasional chance encounters in the lift, Miss Birch might have fancied herself alone in Richelieu House.
She opened her door, and, crossing to the window, jerked up the blind which she had prudently lowered before leaving so that the afternoon sun would not take the colour out of the blue divan cover and matching armchair. With all those pretty Chinese cushions, a guest would never have suspected that the divan was Miss Birch’s bed until, seating himself, his knees flew up and hit him on the chin. There was a small gateleg table at which she had her meals, sitting upright on a blue chair. Black-framed Medici prints, reproductions of old Italian masters, hung in an even row on the distempered cream wall above the bookcase. In the opposite wall were doors leading to a box of a bathroom and a cupboard of a kitchenette.
Miss Birch remained for a few minutes at the window, still grasping umbrella and briefcase, absently watching the barrage balloons lolling over London. They fitted in with her train of thought. She could remember when they didn’t look like absurd silver Jumbos browsing in space but when she had thought of them as guardians and felt consoled because they were there. By leaning to the right and twitching the net curtain aside, she could see down into the street where, five minutes or so earlier, she had been buying her cigarettes. Seen from above, the jagged space where a bomb had fallen just behind the public house was more noticeable than it was from the road, now that they had cleared the debris away. A land mine had come down, too, not far away. After that awful night, the woman at the tobacconist’s had taken Miss Birch into the back parlour to show her the broken windows and the rubble dust lying thick over everything. ‘It’s a wonder the whole place didn’t come down, and that’s a fact,’ she had said, fetching a packet of cigarettes up from under the counter and shoving them over to Miss Birch.
‘Here you are, dear. Pop ’em in your bag. They're short, but if we don’t get our smokes to quiet our nerves we'll all go balmy, more than likely.’
Miss Birch left the window and began taking off her out- door things, noting that the evening looked settled enough to warrant leaving the chubby umbrella at home tomorrow. She hung her suit carefully on a hanger and changed into an old print summer dress which she kept for wearing at home. After that she usually laid the table for supper. When it was over, she would wash up, perhaps glance over the report she had brought home with her, mend a pair of stockings, and go to bed early with a book. It was her usual way of spending a nice quiet evening, but this evening, for some reason, she didn’t feel like setting it in motion right away. Her head ached badly, probably the result of this morning’s row. She went into the bathroom and took a couple of aspirins. Then she came back and sat down in the armchair by the window.
The details of the office upset flitted through her mind again, but only for a moment. Footsteps sounded outside in the corridor, a door banged, and several people seemed to be laughing and talking together. Miss Birch heard a woman's voice saying emphatically, ‘But if we didn’t phone we'll never get a table.’ The pint milk bottle at Flat 6, just across the passage, must have had a party, which was now proceeding out en masse to find some dinner. At one time the occupants of Flat 6 had meant rather more than a milk bottle in Miss Birch’s life. They were a Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers, and night after night in the blitz they had unrolled their mattresses alongside Miss Birch’s mattress in the corridor on Floor B. Miss Birch, over a shared thermos of tea, had learned that Mrs. Chalmers had married when she was eighteen and that Mr. Chalmers was allergic to cats. She came to know by heart such small, intimate details as the colour of their pyjamas, the smell of Mrs. Chalmers’ face cream. And early in the morning, just before the all-clear sounded jubilantly over battered London, Mr. Chalmers would begin to snore.
Those nights, terrible as they had been, certainly had had their compensations. It seemed to Miss Birch, looking back, that the inhabitants of Floor K had been one jolly family, recognising each other with especial friendliness among all the other prone tenants of Richelieu House. There had been little Mary Rycroft from Flat 2, a pretty child who looked as though she oughtn’t to be out alone in a rainstorm, let alone a blitz. There had been Mr. Masters, strolling down the row of mattresses to ask Miss Birch’s help with a tough word in The Times crossword puzzle or to have a little chat about books. One evening he had noticed that she was reading Nicholas Nickleby, and the next evening he had ambled along to say that he had taken her advice and was starting on his tenth reading of Pickwick Papers that very night. ‘You're right, Miss Birch;) he had said, ‘There's nothing like the old fellows for keeping one’s mind off the fellows up there,’ and he had nodded towards the racket overhead. ‘Pickwick seems to make *em unimportant, somehow.’ They had got really close, like old friends in those talks in the stuffy corridor, listening subconsciously for the warning scream, the sudden hole in the air, the slow glacier of bricks and mortar slipping into the street below. Now he was only a man who took off his hat politely in the lift and said ‘Evening’ before fumbling for his key, going in, and shutting his front door.
Little by little, as normality came back and the passages of Richelieu House were no longer filled with flitting figures carrying torches and pillows, the sense of being neighbours had worn off. Mrs. Chalmers, if she and Miss Birch met in the lift, said, ‘Do you know, I’ve been meaning and meaning to ring you,’ and at the back of her worried baby eyes and plucked eyebrows, Miss Birch could see the thought forming that one of these days they must really ask the old girl over, fill her up with gin, do something about it. After a while, even that thought disappeared. Mrs. Chalmers simply said ‘Hello’ and smiled vaguely, as though Miss Birch were someone she had once met at a party.
Sitting in the blue armchair, the headache nagging at her, Miss Birch wondered if it wasn’t partly her own fault. Maybe there was something she could have said or done, some magic password which would have kept that wonderful new friendliness going. If she hadn't frightened them off, Mary Rycroft or Mr. Masters might have been dropping in for a chat this evening. She pictured Mr. Masters saying in his breezy way ‘This is something like!’ as she brought out the beer that she would make a point of keeping in the refrigerator for him. While he drank it, leaning back against the Chinese cushions and flicking his cigarette ash, manlike, over her blue rug, she would tell him about this morning’s dust-up with Danvers. Telling it to him, getting his calm, man’s point of view, would be a relief far greater than the good howl she had promised herself all day. He would say, ‘Don’t worry, my dear girl, it’s nothing,’ and sure enough it would be nothing. Then he would get up, glass in hand, and wander over to the bookcase. ‘I might have known that you’d be the woman to read William Blake,’ he would say cosily.
With sudden determination, Miss Birch stood up. She peeped in the mirror, patted a few stray wisps of hair into place, and gave a nervous twitch to the neck of her dress. Then, looking in her bag to make sure that her key was there, she opened the door of her apartment, closed it behind her, and began walking rapidly down the passage towards the lift.
Mr. Masters’ electric bell had a different note from hers, she noticed. It sounded loud and startled, and Mr. Masters also looked startled when he answered it. ‘Why — come in!’ he said after the faintest possible pause. Her picture of him had been correct, insofar as he was holding a bottle of beer and an opener in his free hand. He was in his shirtsleeves, and when she walked past him into a frowsier version of her own room, she noticed that his tie was lying on the table with the evening paper, some gramophone records, and a bowl of ice cubes. He made a lunge towards it, and she said, ‘Oh, please don’t bother to get smartened up for me! It’s quite warm this evening, isn’t it?”
‘Feels to me as though we're going to get a bit of thunder,’ he said. ‘Sit down, won't you? I was just . . .’ and he made an embarrassed gesture with the beer bottle and the opener.
‘Do go on,’ said Miss Birch. ‘I do hope you don’t mind my dropping in informally like this. As a matter of fact, I haven't a thing to read, and I wondered if you'd very kindly lend me a book.”
It sounded prim to her own ears, like something she might have written on a memo form in the office. Mr. Masters stopped looking nonplussed and, setting down the beer, gestured to the row of untidy bookshelves against the wall corresponding to the one where Miss Birch’s Medici prints hung. ‘Help yourself,’ he said. ‘I don’t know that you'll find anything much there, but you're welcome.”
She came forward and made a pretence of looking at the titles. Smiling up at him, she said, ‘You know, I always think of you as a bookish sort of person, Remember our talks about Dickens and Thackeray and Trollope in the old blitz days.’
The information that she had thought about him at all brought Mr. Masters’ surprised expression back again. ‘Oh, those,’ he said uneasily. ‘Well, thank God that time’s a long way back now. Seems like a nightmare, doesn’t it? I don’t believe we'll ever get em coming over like that again, either.’
‘Oh, I hope not,’ said Miss Birch.
With lightning, cruel clarity she knew that the visit wasn’t going to come off. Nan would have been sitting down within two minutes in the one armchair in the place, crossing her legs above the knee, sharing Mr. Masters’ beer, smoking his cigarettes, roaring with laughter at jokes that wouldn't be bookish quips about Trollope and Thackeray. Miss Birch, peering blindly along the shelves, was tongue-tied. She pulled out a volume without even bothering to look at its title and straightened up. ‘Might I borrow this?’ she asked. There didn’t seem to be much more to say. Mr. Masters became heartier and obviously a good deal relieved as he accompanied her to the door. ‘Any time you want to borrow another, just pop along,’ he said.
Miss Birch’s room seemed very still in the evening sunlight as she let herself in. She walked over to the window and stood looking out again at the silver blimps floating aimlessly against the sky. London looked beautiful in this clear light, calm and radiant, as though its sirens would never sound again this side of the grave. Listening to that implacable silence, Miss Birch felt the delayed tears stinging at the back of her throat and nose. ‘It’s the reaction,’ she said aloud, as though she were defending herself to someone. ‘You can’t go through month after month of that and not get a reaction sometime.’ She dropped Mr. Masters’ book into the chair and became suddenly busy, laying the checked cloth on the gateleg table and putting the milk for her cup of Ovaltine on to boil. It was going to be another nice quiet evening after all, she thought hopelessly.
CUT DOWN THE TREES 4 September 1943
The old lady, Mrs. Walsingham, lived alone in the big house by the river with her maid, old Dossie. Alone, that is to say, except for forty Canadian soldiers who had taken over most of the house, parked their trucks in the lime avenue, and built their huts on the damp English meadows sloping down to the slow, heron-haunted English stream. Mrs. Walsingham had kept for her own use her room and Dossie’s, an extra one for guests, the dining-room, and the library. The drawing- room was under Holland covers, because Dossie and Mrs. Bunt, who came up from the lodge occasionally to lend a hand, could not be expected to keep it dusted and polished too. Dossie had mourned as they packed away the crystal chandeliers and hung dust sheets over the Gainsborough and the Zoffany conversation pieces, but Mrs. Walsingham had been firm.
“There’s already more than you and I can do here,’ she said, ‘and the days of sitting in drawing-rooms are over, for the moment, anyway. We're all too busy.”
‘If we could get a couple of housemaids from the village, that would be something,’ said Dossie sourly. ‘But there are no girls left. They're all in the Waafs or something like that, larking about, getting into mischief with their bobbed heads and their lipstick and all. They'll want sobering down before anyone will take them into good private service after the war, Madam, and no mistake.”
Mrs. Walsingham laughed and limped over to close an emptied Queen Anne cabinet, her stick tapping with a hollow sound on the bare, polished floor. ‘Maybe they won’t want to be taken,’ she said. ‘Until they do, you and I will have to crawl round as best we can, Dossie. That’s the last packing case. Boxall can come in and take it down to the cellars.’
Dossie, still unconvinced, said, ‘Yes, Madam. But if we did get a couple of girls— young ones who wouldn't be called up yet — if we did, it wouldn't be a bit of good with all those soldiers about. You know what happened to Mavis.
‘Well,’ said Mrs. Walsingham briskly, ‘it’s nota bad thing, with the birth rate the way itis. They’re fine young men, the Canadians. You don't want England populated with nothing but old crocks like you and me, do you?'
Dossie sniffed but did not answer. Mrs. Walsingham had behaved with regrettable airiness over the affair of Mavis, the last kitchen maid who had flitted through the big house in the days when the kitchen still had a cook in it. For Mavis, unrepentant and blooming after fatal evening strolls along the river with a corporal from Vancouver, Mrs. Walsingham had managed to find one of those layettes from America with two of everything, one pink, one blue. She had also provided a pram and sent the girl grapes from the hothouses. Not that it was entirely Mavis’s fault, Dossie thought, though it was true that Mavis had gone on her unfortunate expeditions under the willows not with the air of a lamb being led to the slaughter but rather with the spryness of a young pussycat slipping off down the garden. No, it was those men, those soldiers who were to blame for everything.
Dossie had never had any use for the Canadians from the day they came. Of course, it wasn’t precisely their fault that they were there, but it made her sick to hear their big boots clattering up and down the stairs and to see their trucks standing in line along the lime avenue. When she came across a bunch of them messing about, their heads deep in the bonnets of their trucks, she would either hurry past with averted eyes or say primly, ‘Good afternoon,’ and jerk her head in a brief grudging salutation. Sloppy, she would say to herself as she went by, sloppy young chaps in those nasty khaki romper affairs, no spit and polish, nothing smart and military about them at all. They would watch her walking towards them and their heads would slowly swivel to watch her out of sight, with the marooned male’s desperate interest in a skirt, even though the neat navy-blue article in question covered the limbs of Miss Dossie, the old girl at the big house. The more audacious would whistle and shout ‘Hiya, Miss Dossie!’ or even ‘Hiya, sweetheart!’, grinning and wiping the engine oil off their hands along the seat of their pants. Friendly as puppies, they seemed to interpret Dossie’s out- raged glare as that fine old British reserve that you read about in books. Now and then she attempted to put one right. One day a sunburnt blond youngster, coming round to the kitchen on some errand, said cheerfully, ‘Say, your Mrs. Walsingham is certainly a grand old guy. We think she’s swell, the way she stumps around and runs this big old place without any help. Reminds me a lot of my Aunt Katie on the ranch at home.’
Dossie had drawn a deep breath and given him a terse picture of the house as it used to be — shooting parties in the autumn, Mrs. Walsingham in her diamonds at big dinners, and Queen Mary driving over to see the celebrated herbaceous borders when she was staying in the neighbour- hood. Interested but un-cowed, the young soldier stood listening. ‘Yeah,’ he said, ‘yeah, Queen Mary. She’s another grand old guy.’
If they had called Mrs. Walsingham a grand old guy to her face, Dossie well and disapprovingly knew, her mistress would not have objected. She seemed to like them. Peeping from the house, Dossie would see her limping down towards the home farm with two or three of them in attendance on her, a large imperious old woman in her careless black with a shocking old hat skewer anyhow on her grey hair. Now and then she would pause, with her clothes whipping in the wind, and raise her stick to point out a crop or a prize Guernsey to the young men, who seemed noisily appreciative and not respectfully silent in the uncommunicative island way which Dossie could have understood.
Once a week, their officers, who were billeted elsewhere, came to dine with Mrs. Walsingham. On those evenings, more laughter floated out to Dossie, creaking along the passage with the cheese soufflé and the hot plates trundling on a dinner wagon before her. The dinner wagon was another of Mrs. Walsingham’s ideas. ‘I can’t carry a tray, with my stick, and you'll fall flat on your face if you try,’ she had said, ‘but we can both push things,’ so Dossie thereafter made her entrances in the dining-room as though she were propelling a pram. She had to admit grudgingly, that it was nice to see glass reflected in polished mahogany again, the candles lit, and Mrs. Walsingham leaning back and laughing as serenely as though Jenner and the footman were behind her chair, seeing to dinner, instead of only old Dossie wheezing into the room with her dinner wagon. Yes it was nice, although the Canadian gentlemen couldn't be relied upon not to cry in horribly ringing tones across the table, ‘Dossie, you’re a pearl among women! This soufflé is even better than the one last week. It’s great, isn’t it, Mrs. Walsingham?’ Bridling with resentment, Dossie would murmur, ‘Thank you, sir,’ in a voice intended, though failing, to quell some amiable young bear of a major who would be more than likely to bestow on her a cordial hug, its cordiality somewhat heightened by Mrs. Walsingham’s Lafitte’24, when she handed him his hat and coat at the end of the evening.
Except for these small hospitable occasions, Mrs. Walsingham had her meals in the kitchen. Observing Dossie’s horror the first time she had appeared in the kitchen for a meal, she had said tersely, “Less way to carry the food. Warmer, too, in the winter. At my age, I'd rather be warm in here than grand in there with a rug over my knees.’ So she ate cosily and pleasantly, the heat of the kitchen fire toasting her old back, while Dossie withdrew and chewed morosely in the pantry. She disliked ing all invitations to join her, the innovation intensely. It was all part and parcel of the unwarranted bad joke, the conspiracy against Dossie’s way of life, which they called a war and which had taken first the menservants and then the girls one by one, which had stopped the central heating, made a jungle of the borders and a pasture of the lawns, marooned the two old women in a gradually decaying house with forty Canadians, and made ‘Mrs. Walsingham stop dressing for dinner.
‘It’s out of place now,’ she had said one day when she came upon Dossie carefully rolling her evening stockings to put out on the bed as usual. ‘It’s ridiculous for an old woman to dress herself up every night when thousands of young men are being bombed and killed and when thousands more ‘people are starving all over Europe.’
‘I'm sure I don’t know why a lady shouldn't look nice even if they are,’ snapped Dossie.
“Well, ifyou can’t understand that,’ said Mrs. Walsingham, ‘perhaps you can understand that it’s chilly in the evenings without the central heating. I don’t want to take things off, my good woman, I want to put them on. If you must put out something, put out my tweed shooting cape.’
Dossie was shocked to the marrow of her being, but there was nothing to be done about it. When peace came) sane existence would be immediately resumed. Dossie sincerely believed that the big house, quietly chipping and mouldering above its meadows, would be instantly repopulated, as though by a genie’s wand, with faceless figures in housemaid’s print dresses, in dark-blue livery and gardener’s baize aprons. She believed that the lawns would be velvet again, that visiting royalty would once more point a gracious umbrella towards Mrs. Walsingham’s Himalayan poppies, that the gentry would know their places and sit over their claret in the dining-room, where they belonged. Dossie had a full and ungrudging faith in the resiliency of the British upper class. Until that day came, she would look after things as much as possible and wait.
Dossie rebelled a little when Colonel Walsingham, Mrs. Walsingham’s son, came home from the Middle East on special leave.
“You'll be using the dining-room while the Colonel is with us, I take it, Madam,’ she said after he had telephoned that he was in London and would be home in time for dinner.
‘Why?’ said Mrs. Walsingham wickedly. ‘He'll be much more comfortable in the kitchen — always used to like going in there as a little boy, you remember. And I don’t suppose he’s accustomed to have things very formal in the desert.’
“No, Madam, said Dossie, going off to set the dining-room table with the scanty silver that hadn't been sent to the bank.
It was the first time Colonel Walsingham had seen his home since the soldiers took over. He walked round and looked at it all quietly and observantly. It was a beautiful August evening and some of the men were playing baseball in one of the meadows. Others were sunbathing after a dip in the river. The smoke from the cookhouse went up thin and straight into the cloudless blue sky and in the house, at one of the upper windows, a soldier was whistling, throwing in an occasional ‘Da-da de da’. As the Colonel stood looking down from the terrace, a rabbit came out from behind a group of magnolias and began nibbling away at the long grass on the lawn. It moved confidently, taking no notice of the Colonel, as though it didn’t expect to be disturbed.
Dossie had grimly laid out Mrs. Walsingham’s black lace dinner dress and set the open jewel cases on the dressing table, so the old lady looked very handsome sitting opposite her son at dinner. He tried not to laugh at the unexpected sight of old Dossie tottering in and out, hanging onto her dinner wagon like an elderly child learning to walk by supporting itself with a toy horse on wheels. ‘I had no idea that Dossie could cook,’ he said.
‘She hadn't either,’ said Mrs. Walsingham. ‘She’s an invaluable creature in lots of ways. Her trouble is that she hates adjusting to the war and she doesn’t like me to adjust, either. She has always refused to adjust to anything. I sometimes think that if there’s ever a social revolution in England, they'll string Dossie up first before they bother about me.’
Their coffee was waiting for them in the library, where Dossie had been to shake up the sofa cushions and freshly crease The Times before ranging it with The Field and The Spectator on the long velvet stool by the fireplace. This room looks as though nothing had happened, thought the Colonel, strolling over to the window to listen to the distant, nostalgic Canadian singing floating on the quiet air at the back of the house.
‘They've cut down some of the trees,’ he said.
‘They had to, to put up some of their paraphernalia,’ said Mrs. Walsingham. “They were very nice about it. Do you mind, Edward? To tell you the truth, I think it’ — lets in more light and air. It’s altered the view from this side an improvement of the house, but what’s a view? Everything else is changing so fast I suppose we shouldn't bother about trees and water.
He nodded, looking out at the gap where the trees had been. He didn’t know why that depressed him far more than the latrines dug in the paddock where his pony used to snuffle a hay bag, or the boots clumping on bare boards overhead, or even old Dossie trundling her dinner wagon. After Mrs. Walsingham had gone to bed, he found a stick and called the ecstatic spaniel for a walk round the woods. By the time he got back it was twilight, too dark to notice the huts or the trucks in the drive, and he stood for a moment looking up at the dark shape of the house, which now seemed familiar again, like an old friend sitting against the light so that wrinkles were unnoticeable.
Dossie was lurking in wait for him in the hall.
“The whisky-and-soda are in the library, sir,’ she said. ‘Do you wish me to call you at eight o'clock, as usual?’
The Colonel opened-bis mouth to tell her that he didn’t want calling, that she should have gone to bed and left him to find the whisky and soda for himself. He closed it again, for he was aware that Dossie was watching him anxiously. The old woman's eyes seemed to implore him to play their game for a little while longer, to pretend that things were just as they used to be, that their world, which had come to an end, could still be saved. And he heard himself answering meekly, dutifully, ‘Yes call me at eight, will you, Dossie?’