YEAR OF DECISION 29 April 1944
Mark Goring sometimes reflected, without bitterness but with rather wry amusement, how he had pictured a war, back in the unbelievable days of peace, and how his own particular war had turned out. The fact couldn’t have been more ludicrously different from the fancy. In the first place, he had always somehow imagined himself in the thick of things, living a life which would be quite sharply defined from his peacetime life, dangerous, difficult, and exciting. Nothing of the sort had happened, of course. The fact that he was a specialist in a particular subject had quickly settled him for the duration in a government office, behind an impressively large desk which would doubtless be regarded with a good deal of envy by many other young Englishmen now slogging across Italy. War had differed from peace only in that one worked harder, smoked more, and was progressively more and more uncomfortable at home. But discomfort was hardly danger; except for dodging a few bombs in the blitz, his had been a remarkably safe war. It had taught him none of the stinging, salutary lessons that he had expected. Instead, he had picked up all sorts of curious, unlikely bits of information, such as how to make a bed, scour a greasy saucepan, and lay a breakfast table so that it did not too greatly resemble the haphazard design of the March Hare’s tea party.
It was often a toss-up in Mark’s mind as to which was the better thing to do to help Janet — to stay up in London at the club all week or to go back at night to the desirable residence, on a Buckinghamshire common, which they still called home. He could never quite decide whether the charm of his company made up for the trouble he created or whether Janet didn’t really prefer to craw] gratefully, after the sort of scratched-up meal which women apparently enjoyed when they were alone, into an early and solitary bed. On the nights he stayed in London, he had to admit guiltily that it was rather pleasant to dine in peace, off china that he wouldn't later have to swab awkwardly with a little mop, and to read luxuriously in a bed which no one expected him to make next morning. Lying there comfortably in a neat room in a club where there was still port in the cellars and help in the kitchen, he would feel bad about Janet, struggling along at home with a biggish house and the dreadful, inescapable fact that the human body needs stoking three times a day. Of course everybody was in the same boat. Servants hardly existed any longer, and it was worse for the old people like his mother, who hadn't a soul to help her in a great barn of a place in Dorset, and four hungry land girls coming in at all hours with their great pink mouths wide open for her to drop hot, satisfying food into. Yes, everybody was in the same boat all right, though it sometimes seemed to Mark that Janet and the rest of their class were making unnecessarily heavy weather of it by refusing to recognise that they were bang in the middle of a social revolution. Life continued in the same old pattern, distorted but»recognisable. The Gorings still dined off a polished table, by candlelight, though Mark couldn't help feeling that the sensible thing to do would be to camp in the kitchen. And why not keep the same knife and fork right through dinner, as they made you do in small provincial French restaurants? It would save an astronomical amount of washing up yearly, Mark calculated. But the idea had affronted Janet, who preferred to weep tears of fatigue into the washing-up water. With the helpless obedience and neatness of the performing poodle going through its routine although the rest of the troupe had defaulted, she turned down their bed and laid out her night things, his pyjamas, as they had found them every night of their peacetime married lives. ‘For heaven's sake, why bother?’ Mark would say. ‘It doesn’t matter to me or Hitler whether I pick up my py offa chair or the floor.’ But Janet would answer obstinately, ‘It matters to me, though,’ and go on smoothing the eiderdown, setting her blue mules invitingly, as though the action were yet another moral shot fired at the slowly advancing enemy, as though by setting the mules in their accustomed place she was nailing the brave, idealistic upper-class colours securely for another twenty-four hours.
It was funny, but when he had thought of war back in the good old days, before it had happened, he supposed that he had vaguely pictured Janet seeing him off somewhere, crying down his collar, writing him her particular brand of funny, sweet letter, and waiting for him on an unidentified platform, looking lovely and desirable in a dress he liked. Well, it hadn't worked out that way. She had seen him off nowhere, she did all her crying into piles of the children’s darning after the nine o'clock news, and she seldom looked lovely because she was too busy or tired to care except in sporadic bursts, when she applied a handful of this or that with the cynicism of a witch doctor trying a little juju on a dead woman. ‘I’m dead, I’m absolutely dead’ had become one of her favorite expressions. War probably hadn't turned out the way she’d expected, either, poor little devil. No doubt she had seen it as a heroic landscape against which she would be gay and courageous, but it had contracted to a strip of floor between stove and sink; the gaiety and courage weren't needed to welcome home a returning warrior in a business suit who had somehow managed to survive the perils of the London rush hour. Maybe it was morbid of him to imagine that she would be happier in a one-room flat somewhere, snatching sandwiches in cafés, and mailing loving air letters to a husband who, thank God, the Army was feeding thousands of miles away.
When they had built the house, it hadn't struck Mark that all its rooms were too big, that the hardwood floors could look like the Sahara to a woman crawling over them with a tin of polish, and that its light paintwork showed up their nice bits of furniture and grubby childish finger marks with equal success. In those days one didn’t worry about things like that. Now the house had become an Old Man of the Sea whom, however much he throttled them, they couldn’t unseat. If they sold it, they had nowhere to go, and there were Bill and Sally to think of. It was so important for children, said Janet, frantically nailing more of her pathetic little tattered colours to the mast, to have a secure background, although Mark wasn’t certain that getting out from under the feet of a harassed mother all day long was precisely the sort of beautiful, tranquil thing she had in mind. Motherhood was another of Janet’s gay and courageous things which in the present hurly-burly, was taking a beating.
Of course he knew perfectly well that he was damned lucky. He and Janet had each other, their home, their children. There were plenty of people who would consider, quite legitimately, that he was having a pleasant and interesting war, job was an important one; without even trying to, he was making hundreds of contacts which would be very useful after it was over and he was paddling his own canoe again. It was just that he hadn’t pictured himself sitting out Armageddon in an office chair, helping to keep the home fires burning with his sleeves rolled up and one of Janet’s aprons tied round his middle. It was funny, that was all.
Going up to London one spring morning, Mark glanced down the Times casualty list and saw that a man called Nigel Travers, who had been at school with him, had been killed in action with the Parachute Corps in Italy. Good Lord, old Travers leaping out of planes in parachutes, and he must have been forty or thereabouts, with a nice big wife and some kids, Mark reflected. A quiet, funny sort of devil, too — not the sort of chap you'd have suspected of going out that way. He put the paper down, and began to worry about the hot-water boiler, which hadn't looked too good when he stoked it up before bolting breakfast and dashing for the train, Janet, who had a cold, hadn't looked too good either. One or both of them, he felt, would have given up by the time he got home that night. He picked up the paper again, but the boiler kept on getting between him and the Russians, progress in Italy, poor old Travers plummeting down into some peasant’s little bit of vineyard instead of going on, year after undistinguished year, getting in and out of bed with his big, jolly wife.
He wasn’t surprised when, later in the morning, Janet rang up to say that she had a temperature and thought it must be flu. A neighbour had charitably come to the rescue and carted off the children for the day, and she was now taking her shivering self to bed. The boiler, Mark was equally unastonished to learn, had gone out. ‘Leave it until I get home,’ he said with all the cheerfulness he could muster. ‘And for God’s sake take it easy, darling, and keep warm.’
He bought a paper on the way out to lunch. Life was a perpetual buying of papers, glancing, discarding, as though it were the only way of convincing oneself that the plans over which one slaved day after day, calculating, arguing around tables in close rooms, were somewhere being put into effect by real, living flesh and blood. Another softening-up raid on the French coast, another statesman said that this would be the year of decision, a party of young Norwegians had escaped ina fishing boat. That’s the right stuff, thought Mark, that’s the right sort of war to be in if yon’ve got to be in one at all. To be twenty-one, sound of wins limb, shoving off from some dark jetty with your heart banging —yes, that would be all right. Meanwhile, Janet had the flu.
At his club the dining-room was full, mostly of middle- aged, self-confident-looking men leaning alertly forward in discreetly pitched conversations, as though settling the ‘war out of hand between sherry and cigar. Were any of them in jams at home, he wondered. It was hard to picture them in their shirtsleeves at the sink, but maybe it would be equally hard for them to picture him that way. An Air Vice-Marshal across the room nodded at him, and he thought, Has your wife got some help, or do you have to get down on your knees in those beautiful trousers, with that chestful of ribbons, and light up the kitchen boiler for her? He started thinking about Travers again. He’d have to hunt up Mrs. Travers’ address and write to her, although there was nothing much to say. He didn’t know why the thought of Travers, of all people, choosing to get himself killed in that particular way should make him feel faintly irritated, but it did. It seemed so unnecessary, when there were hundreds of safer jobs which he could easily have plumped for. Well, that was hardly a line which would make Mrs. Travers feel better.
Back in the office, the incredible thing happened. Mark hadn't finished shaking the spring rain off his hat when his Miss Fletcher said that Arbuthnot would like to see him right away. When he went along, Arbuthnot told him that he was to be sent to Delhi in about ten days’ time. By plane, of course, and probably on to Chungking — just like that, as briskly and prosaically as though he were being asked to pop across the road and mail a letter. ‘All right for you, I suppose?” said Arbuthnot, squinting up at him. Mark thought of Janet briefly before he nodded and said ‘Fine’, and they settled down to details. When he finally got back to his own office, he still couldn’t believe it. After over four years of sitting in one place with his nose to the grindstone, the idea of getting on a plane and going somewhere made him feel like a child let out of school. The whole job might take six months, Arbuthnot had said. The only unpleasant part ahead was telling Janet, but he’d get over that somehow. She would have to go down to his mother’s — hard on the old lady, who would have Janet, Bill, and Sally added to the ever-ravenous land girls, but it would be a bit of company for them all while he was away. Anyway, other men’s wives were having to face infinitely worse separations every day, and it was probably about time that Janet had her share.
When he opened his front door that evening, his house greeted him with the chilly air ofa home unswept, unwarmed, ungarnished. A jumble of garments and muddy gum boots in the hall indicated that the charitable neighbour had brought the children home and, judging by sounds from above, was now trying to get them to bed. Mark went up to the nursery and said, ‘Mrs. Stevens, you ought to have a medal struck for this. Don’t you stay a minute longer. I'll finish them off.’ The charitable neighbour, looking relieved, said, ‘Well, I have got Mr. Stevens’ supper to get, but I’ll be over in the morning first thing to see how Mrs. Goring is,’ and went off. Mark took off his coat, set Bill to shovelling cereal and milk into his sister’s mouth and went along to Janet.
She looked flushed and harassed, lying huddled up in a little pink knitted jacket.
‘I'll be up tomorrow,’ she said. “The house must be looking awful.’
“You'll stay right there,’ said Mark. ‘Mrs. Stevens and I are doing fine. We hardly miss you at all.’ I won't tell her about Delhi tonight, he thought. I'll wait until she’s feeling a bit better, poor thing.
‘Mark, Bill ought to have some Syrup of Figs,’ Janet said. ‘I'm sure Mrs. Stevens hasn't given him any.’
‘All right,’ he said, ‘I'll see to it.’
He shook up the pillows, collected some dirty things, and went out. ‘I don’t suppose the hens have been shut up,’ she called hoarsely after him. Mark could almost feel affectionate towards the hens tonight. But what, he wondered, did one do with nine Rhode Island Reds when one unexpectedly went to India? Perhaps the invaluable Mrs. Stevens could come to the rescue there too. Going back to the nursery, he transferred all the cereal that wasn’t on the floor into Bill's mouth, sat Sally expertly on her pot, and finally got them both pinned down in their cots. Then he went downstairs and started to wash up the debris. What did you do in the Great War of Decision, Daddy? Stood at the sink, my boy, and got the sticky cereal unglued from your spoon. But only ten more nights and he’d be on his way. The hot-water boiler stood looking at him like acold, malevolent black goblin, and he remembered that he must light it up. The kitchen looked in a fearful mess, too. It was some time before he had it straight and went up to Janet with a cup of Ovaltine and a fresh hot-water bottle.
“Poor Mark!’ she said. ‘I do hate to see you do this.”
“Don’t you worry,’ he said. ‘I love it”.
He sat down on her bed with his arm round her shoulders while she drank the Ovaltine.
‘By the way,’ he said, ‘do you remember Nigel Travers? We met him and his wife - big, fair girl - dancing at the Berkeley one night, remember? Well, he’s been killed with the parachute chaps.’ He couldn't stop the note of irritation from creeping into his voice. ‘Last man in the world you'd have expected to join an outfit like that, somehow. He was older than me, you know.’
‘Dancing at the Berkeley,’ Janet said slowly. ‘It seems an awful time ago.’ To his surprise, she suddenly began to cry. ‘I suppose you wish it were you,’ she sobbed. “You wish you’d gone off with Nigel Travers and jumped out of planes and got killed.”
‘Darling, don’t be an idiot,’ said Mark.
“Yes, you do, you do,’ she said, crying bitterly.
Eventually he got her calmed down and went downstairs again to lay the breakfast table for the morning, put the milk bottles out, and, as an afterthought, try to find himself a snack in the larder. He collected some bread and cheese and a bottle of beer and carried them into the living-room. The nine o'clock news was just coming on. An order of the day from Marshal Stalin, said the calm B.B.C. voice .. . and heavy fighting is in progress . . . and the Admiralty regrets to announce. .. . Somewhere or other, thought Mark, munching his bread and cheese, it’s still going on. For men crouching in a muddy ditch, struggling in oily water, it had at least the bitter satisfaction of something seen in the round, not simply a column of figures locked in a government briefcase. Ten days from now, he thought, feeling suddenly lighter-hearted. As he stood at the sink later on, washing up the last, positively the last bloody plate of the day, he heard the bombers from the nearby flying field beginning to go over on the night’s assignment. They droned slowly, purposefully, as regularly as buses passing down Piccadilly, over the house, the children sleeping in their cots, Janet feverishly dozing in the untidy bedroom which must worry her so much, poor dear.
Pretty soon he went up to bed. Janet moved restlessly as he switched off the light and lay down. I'll wait for two or three days more, thought Mark, and then I’ll have to tell her. As he lay staring in front of him, listening to the still steady roar of the bombers, he pictured himself sitting in the plane, working at a bunch of papers on his knees, and suddenly a little speck appearing in the distance. The man sitting behind him leaned forward sharply. ‘Messerschmitt,’ he said curtly. It could happen, thought Mark, it could happen perfectly well. And he lay smiling, listening to Janet cough, and hugging the thought that danger was as possible for him after all as it was for Nigel Travers or the next man.
THE DANGER 8 July 1944
Mrs. Dudley's evacuees had gone at last, and an almost supernatural hush had seemed to descend upon the house and garden the moment they left. As joyfully as cats plunging back into a dustbin, they had returned to London, without expressing gratitude or regret, without giving a shadow of a sign that four years of living in the midst of what Mrs. Dudley called Beauty had made the slightest impression on them. The Rudds had remained sturdily impervious to Beauty right up to the last. On a morning when Mrs. Dudley’s magnolias were bursting wide in the sunshine and patches of frosty Alpine blues and yellows were beginning to dapple the rockery, where Mr. Dudley’s terrible old gardening hat could be seen slowly moving, Mrs. Rudd had stood gazing out of the window with an eye only too clearly nostalgic for a good Woolworth’s. ‘Ever so quiet, isn’t it?’ she had said, staring contemptuously at a gentian. ‘Might be miles and miles from everything, really, instead of only ten minutes’ walk from the village.’ “That's what we like about the house,’ Mrs. Dudley had replied, to which Mrs. Rudd had said forgivingly, ‘Well, everyone to his taste, of course,’ and flung the lipsticked stub of her cigarette out into Beauty's face before getting on with her lackadaisical pushing of a mop over the hall parquet.
It had been part of the agreement, when the Rudds arrived, that Mrs. Rudd, besides keeping their own quarters clean, should assist about the house. Both these clauses, Mrs. Dudley had speedily discovered, were mere light-hearted figures of speech, for Mrs, Rudd was a slut. The word seemed to have been invented for her. Now that the Rudds had gone, now that the beautiful, incredible silence had settled down over a house empty of strangers again, the full horror of Mrs. Rudd could be relished, like the details of an appalling illness mercifully past: the mane of yellow hair which became brunette an inch from the parting, the broad bottom in navy-blue slacks. Mrs. Rudd had donned trousers at the beginning of the war and was perpetually ready to hoist the yardarm or do any other athletic exercises which might be required of her. For shopping in the village, Mrs. Dudley, who was conservative, had considered that the costume was excessive, but Mrs. Rudd had clung to the navy-blue pants, to which she had added a revealing sweater on chilly days and a flimsy blouse, unbuttoned to interesting limits, on hot ones. In winter, to prove that she was a cut above the ordinary evacuee caste, Mrs. Rudd had also donned a short jacket, made out of the fur of some depressed, yellowish animal that, like Mrs. Rudd’s hair, seemed somewhat undecided at the partings. Mr. Dudley, leaving his garden long enough to potter down to the village and collect his monthly bottle of Scotch, always shrank back nervously into the shop if he spotted the Rudd cavalcade coming up the street — Sonny in the push chair, Marlene and Marina trotting either side of the jaunty maternal behind. It was curious, he reported mildly to Mrs. Dudley, what a really libidinous effect high heels had when combined with tight trousers, a fur monkey jacket, and shoulder-length golden hair. He had mentioned a few Biblical characters of whom he had been irresistibly reminded as he watched their evacuee languidly shopping for Marina’s corn flakes and Sonny's Syrup of Figs.
Mrs. Rudd had also departed from the usual evacuee pattern by having a husband with her, a silent, seemingly melancholy man who was employed by a firm which had moved its files and office staff out of bombing reach. To Messrs. Brown, Clutterbuck & Brown's sudden stout conviction that the worst of the blitzes was over, Mrs. Dudley now owed the unspeakable beatitude of being rid of the Rudds. She could hardly believe that she would never again have to listen to the marital difficulties, the embarrassing confidences, which had oozed from Mrs. Rudd as she slapped a duster over the drawing-room china of a morning. Sometimes Mrs. Dudley had felt her colour deepening guiltily when she encountered Mr. Rudd and his pipe mooning round the garden in the evenings. ‘Still waters run deep,’ Mrs. Rudd had often significantly observed, with a side swipe of the duster at some particularly frail Chelsea nymph. “There’s no knowing with those quiet types, is there? I suppose I didn’t ought to have married Harold, really. When I had my figure, there were no heights I couldn't have attempted, the variety stage included.’ ‘Well, you've got your children as compensation,’ Mrs. Dudley would suggest soothingly. And Mrs. Rudd would admit that there were always the kiddies — or the kidlets, as she some- times, in moments of acute maternal affection, called them. Marlene and Marina seemed to be trying to make up for her disappointment over the variety stage by eternally practising the dancing, their soiled hair ribbons waggling up and down, their small, sharp faces solemn as they hoofed in almost perfect unison on the gravel or along the passage, when Mr. Dudley was taking an afternoon nap. Sonny, a pasty-faced child, lived on a diet of his own and his parents’ sweet ration, alternated with copious draughts of Syrup of Figs. Mrs. Rudd dealt out sticky kisses and smart cuffs impartially to her brood, but when Mrs. Dudley’s married sons, John and Andrew, came down on leave, her tigerish fondness for the kidlets seemed to wane. On these occasions the rolling blue eye and the voluptuous curves appeared to roll and curl even more suggestively, her blouses get more flimsy, their buttons still more precarious. ‘My God, that woman!’ Andrew had groaned, raiding Mr. Dudley’s Scotch after a sudden ambush in the rose garden. ‘She’s a shocker. You'll have to get rid of her, Mother. Ring up Miss Sykes and say they'll have to find her another billet.’
‘I've rung up Nancy Sykes until I’m tired of it,’ Mrs. Dudley said despairingly. ‘She always says that this is the only house that can take them all, and she prefers not to split up families. Sometimes I think they’re here forever.’
The taxi had come for them, finally. Sonny’s push chair had been strapped on top. Mr. Rudd had seemed to be on the verge of struggling to say something fitting before he gave it up and turned to help with the luggage. For the journey, Mrs. Rudd’s plump calves had emerged from the stern sexlessness of women at war and were sleek in tan rayon below the hem of her check costume. ‘I daresay the place will seem ever so funny without us,’ she exclaimed to Mrs. Dudley, pushing the head of Marina’s kitten back into its basket. Sure enough, after the taxi had disappeared down the drive, with Mr. Rudd waving radiantly like a bride from among the armfuls of flowers which Marina and Marlene had selected from the borders, the place did seem funny. In the silence of the house starting immediately to settle back comfortably into character again, Mrs. Dudley reflected that its inmates could also settle back into character —an elderly couple of quiet interests, getting on with their small, puttering war jobs and their gardening. The brassy nightmare interlude of the Rudds was over.
The house, she thought, seemed not only funny but positively eerie. She stood in the hall, listening for the gramophone, Mrs. Rudd’s cigarette cough, Sonny whining, Marina and Marlene going shuffle, shuffle, stomp, stomp along the kitchen passage, Mrs. Rudd humming ‘Yours’ in a fruity contralto as she slopped tea leaves into the sink. Silence, nothing but rich, soaking silence. ‘Irue, their smell remained in the rooms they had occupied ~ a stale, close smell, in which it was possible to identify face powder, food, Sonny’s white mice, Mr. Rudd’s pipe, and Mrs. Rudd. Mrs. Dudley, violently flinging open windows, wondered whether she should burn a fumigating candle, as though the Rudds had been an infectious disease.
But happiness was beginning to steal over her. She gave up trying to do anything, and went out into the hall and started drifting aimlessly from room to room, luxuriously listening to their emptiness. She couldn’t remember when she had last felt so happy.
There was nothing to warn Mrs. Dudley that this halcyon peace was threatened when, one morning a week or so after the Rudds had left, the front doorbell rang. It was a perfect morning, Mrs. Dudley had just noted contentedly, and the garden was beginning to look its very best. She still could not quite believe that at any moment the kidlets would not come whooping from the rockery, their fists full of her most precious Alpines, or that Mrs. Rudd would not be issuing forth, cigarette dangling from her lips, to shake out a duster and gaze round hungrily for the postman or any stray titbit in trousers to sweeten the howling wilderness. But thank God it was true, thought Mrs. Dudley cheerfully, on her way through her clean, silent house to open the front door.
The girl standing on the doorstep, a thin young woman without a hat, said, ‘Mrs. Dudley? My name is Rachel Craig, and I'ma friend of your daughter-in-law’s. Peg said that you wouldn’t mind my coming along to see you.’
‘Do come in, won't you?’ said Mrs. Dudley. ‘And forgive my looking so untidy. Peg may have told you that, like most people these days, we've got no servants at all. Are you staying somewhere down here?”
‘No,’ the girl said. ‘That's just the point. I’m not staying down here, but I want to be. Peg thought that you might be able to help.”
An appalling suspicion entered Mrs. Dudley's head, but it was too late to do anything — to say that she was the char woman, for instance, and that Mrs. Dudley was out. They sat down in the living-room, round which the visitor gazed appreciatively. ‘How lovely to see a real home again, after all the furnished lodgings I've been in,’ she said. ‘I suppose some time George and I will have a home of our own.’ She smiled at Mrs, Dudley, who smiled warily back. “He's been stationed down here, at the camp over at Fairfield,’ the girl said. ‘Of course he doesn’t know for how long I've been trying to get rooms somewhere near for me and Evelyn — that’s my baby — but everywhere is so full up with evacuees and things, isn’t it? Anyway, I was nearly despairing, and then I ran into Peg in London yesterday, and she said perhaps you'd be willing to take us as paying guests.’
For a wild moment, Mrs. Dudley thought of saying, ‘Look here, I’m alone and in peace for the first time in four years. I’m sick to death of strangers in my house. Won't you please go away?’ But the impulse to be brutally candid passed, and the baser instinct to slide out of it somehow, with as much social grace as possible, overcame Mrs. Dudley. She heard her own voice saying instantly, plausibly, ‘I’m sorry. I'd like to help you out, but I simply haven't the room.’
Mrs. Craig's glance wandered gently round the big living- room and out into the spacious airiness of the hall. ‘Evelyn and I would tuck up in any corner,’ she said. ‘You wouldn't know we were here, really. She’s a very good baby.’
But even good babies yell sometimes, Mrs. Dudley thought. ‘They yell, their napkins simmer perpetually on the stove and festoon the bathroom, they start to crawl and then to toddle like homing pigeons straight for the rockery and the Alpines. The Craigs, coming for weeks, might stay for years, as the Rudds had done. Sonny Rudd had arrived a pasty infant in arms; he had left still pasty but hideously active, capable of all forms of small-boy mischief. And how do I know, thought Mrs. Dudley in a panic, that your George won't turn out to be another quiet type like Mrs. Rudd’s Harold, and you'll tell me about it day in, day out, pinned up against my own kitchen wall, where I can’t escape? She began to explain that there really wasn’t all that space, because she had to keep rooms ready for her sons and their wives when they came on leave. Then there were the grandchildren, who spent their school holidays with her. John’s boy and girl, as she spoke of them, mysteriously multiplied and became troops of boys and girls, pouring home every few weeks with their hockey sticks and cricket bats.
Mrs. Craig, interrupting as though she hadn't really been following, said, ‘I’d be awfully glad to help with the house. I'ma good cook — or George used to think so. You see, if only we could be somewhere not too far away, so that he could see us sometimes, before he gets sent goodness knows where, it will make all the difference.’
With terror in her heart, Mrs. Dudley felt that the Craigs were taking shape, were becoming as threateningly real and three-dimensional as the Rudds. In another moment, the noises ofa fresh set of alien lives would be invading the privacy of her quiet house. She would have to get used all over again to alien sounds —to Mrs. Craig’s way of coughing, of running upstairs, to George’s motor bike on the drive, to their bath water running, their voices murmuring. In another moment she would give in. Feeling hypocritical, hating herself, she said smoothly, ‘I do feel so sorry for all you young people and I wish I could have managed it. But there it is. It’s really too bad of Peg to send you down on a wild-goose chase like this.’
Mrs. Craig’s disappointed face looked suddenly very young and sharp round the cheekbones. The furnished lodgings, thought Mrs. Dudley with a pang, possibly didn’t do very well in the way of food.
After that, the visit crumpled. On their way to the door, Mrs. Dudley suggested a name or two — had she tried there? Yes, Mrs. Craig had. Everywhere was full, Mrs. Craig said, trying to smile and not succeeding, in a perfectly adult way. She shook hands and walked away down the drive, and Mrs. Dudley went briskly back into the house like a woman expecting at any moment a sudden influx of grandchildren. In the living-room she sat down limply, with a feeling of weakness round the knees and drew a long, quivering breath of relief. The danger was over and she felt shamefacedly pleased with herself, as though she had been clever in a way which didn’t bear examining too closely. She began telling herself quickly that it was really too much to ask, coming too soon after four nightmare years of being pressed to the suffocating, slatternly bosom of Mrs. Rudd. I’m not so young as I was, she told herself. I've done my bit and more. Everyone says so.
Presently she glanced at the clock and calculated that Mrs. Craig must be nearly at the station. She wouldn't feel entirely safe until after the London train had gone, though. The familiar light stutter of the little French clock was soothing. The clock, a branch of roses tapping against the window, the claws of the old terrier clicking across the hall parquet — there was not a sound in her own quiet house which she could not identify. We are alone together, they said. We belong to you and to nobody else. She waited for the usual rush of pure happiness to flood over her at the thought, as it had done so many times since the Rudds’ taxi bore them away. But today something was wrong, for nothing happened. Nothing at all thought Mrs. Dudley, staring miserably at the clock, which soon told her that the London train would now be steaming out of the station.
THE WASTE OF IT ALL 16 December 1944
Philip had been in the Middle East for over three years now, and sometimes it seemed to Frances even longer than that. They had been married very soon after meeting each other and he had been sent abroad a few months later. Sometimes, in a panic, Frances would close her eyes and try to remember Philip’s face in detail, how he smiled, how his voice sounded. On good days he came to life perfectly, but if she was tired or depressed she could bring him back only in fragments that wouldn’t connect, like a jigsaw puzzle from which the key pieces were lost. Or if eventually she assembled him, he wouldn’t work in her head. He’d stand looking at her dumbly, not smiling, and she would have the disconcerting feeling that he was some stranger she had met and liked at a party but couldn’t give more than a name and a face to.
Of course letters helped to keep them in touch. Philip wrote long, full letters by every mail, and so did Frances. But sometimes she would be brought up short by the realisation that her chatter was stuffed with all the mental and physical debris acquired in the three years without him — allusions to friends he had never met, books he hadn't read, little jokes which they hadn't laughed at first together — and that Philip must, at times, try to fit together his own jigsaw Frances and fail miserably. Worst of all to her was the awful suspicion that she had almost grown used to doing without him. For the first two years she had missed him unbearably, but now her loneliness was something which she put on automatically when she got up and hardly noticed any more, like a person who had become accustomed to wearing glasses or a false limb.
Frances wrote a lot about the cottage, for she knew that Philip enjoyed the smallest, silliest details. He had wanted, touchingly, to leave her in their own home. He had an old-fashioned wish to frame a woman in a setting which would include a fire, a lamp, and a work box, and he had hated Frances’s undomestic plan of getting into the uniform of the first service that would have her. They had found the cottage on one of his last leaves, a Hans Andersen place into which someone with taste had fitted less elfin modern plumbing and other conveniences. ‘On a good train service to London, too,’ Philip had pointed out. ‘It’s really a buy. If we ever want to sell we'll be able to get twice what we're giving, before the war’s over.’ But she knew that he didn’t want her to sell. He liked thinking of her there, safely anchored, something to come home to. He had always been fond of drawing little plans of things, and his letters were full of diagrams explaining to Frances what she was to have done about a leaking bit of the thatch roof, where the hen house was to go, exactly how he wanted the new apple trees planted. He was a countryman by birth, a Londoner only by adoption, and he loved that sort of thing.
Frances, a Londoner by birth and a countrywoman by adoption, grappled valiantly with thatch, hens, and orchard in the intervals of a full-time job at a government office which had been evacuated to the neighbourhood. A series of women friends and their children had shared the cottage with her. She became used to the light clip of feminine conversation, to light eating on trays. When a man came to the house, his voice ‘seemed to roar like a giant’s and the floors seemed to shudder under his unaccustomed tread.
One day the supply of women friends ran out, and Frances, wildly bicycling round, couldn't find a soul who was free to come and clean the place and have a meal waiting for her when she got home in the evenings. She was on the point of giving up, Philip or no Philip, and retreating thankfully to London, where thatch didn't leak and eggs were to be had conveniently dried from grocery store shelves, when Margaret suddenly happened.
‘I'm delighted about Margaret,’ Philip wrote some weeks later. ‘Now, perhaps, you'll get some decent food to eat. So far as I can make out, you and the girl friends have been getting along on lettuce and cups of tea. Your description of the Home where you found her chilled my blood. Pure Dickens, my God! She must think it’s heaven now she and the kid are with you, darling.’
Frances, folding Philip’s letter, could hear Margaret singing in the kitchen above the sizzle of frying bacon and certainly sounding cheerful. Frances began to drink her coffee, thinking of the Home of the Good Samaritan, to which a friend’s suggestion had sent her. Chilling, she thought, had been the word for it. Sitting uneasily on a hard sofa in the matron’s parlour, a small room smelling frigidly of beeswax and charity, she had looked out into the sunshine where four or five unmarried mothers were pushing prams up and down the gravel walks.
“We have to be very careful, of course, where we place our girls,’ the matron was saying. ‘Once they make a mistake of this kind, they so often get into — well, the habit, you might say.’ She looked at Frances piercingly, as though suspecting her of keeping a bordello. ‘You say you're at work all day. Would Margaret be likely to see any men while you're out?”
Frances thought swiftly of the lad who delivered the papers, a grubby urchin of twelve, and of old Bostock, the gardener, who hobbled in two afternoons a week to dig the vegetables. She felt justified in answering, ‘None, absolutely none,’ and the matron, after thoughtful survey of Frances’s wedding ring, agreed that Margaret and the baby should go to her next day.
‘The father won't worry you — that’s one thing,’ the matron said. ‘One of these soldiers — married, of course. Somewhere on the Continent now, I suppose, and never a thought for the poor girls, you may be sure.’ She sniffed and her uniform crackled indignantly.
‘It’s a lovely baby anyway,’ said Frances. “They always are,’ said the matron, sniffing again, as though she would have preferred the wages of sin to be a little less blatantly plump, dimpled, and thriving.
Frances wrote back to Philip and told him that it was a great success. Margaret was a good cook and, in her satisfaction at being delivered out of the Samaritan bosom, she cleaned the place with a ferocity which echoed in Frances’s ears as she bicycled off in the mornings. Margaret was a big, fat girl with a remarkably plain face; Frances could only suppose that the acute homesickness of one of the visiting warriors had been responsible for Margaret's baby, Raymond. None of the friends who had shared the cottage had had very young children, and it was extraordinary what a difference Raymond made in the household. Frances had always felt that the cottage had the shallow, rootless air of a temporary wartime home, but now it began to look as though the people living there didn’t intend to move away. Washing billowed permanently from Margaret's line between the two old pear trees. Frances had managed to borrow a pram and a cot, which old Bostock had fixed up, and Raymond slept or philosophically examined the sky all day out on the little patch of lawn.
At the beginning, thinking of Bostock, of the milk girl, whose nose was an inquisitive red button as she clumped past the pram with the bottles, Frances had said to Margaret, “Would it be easier ifwe called you Mrs. Judd? It might sort of settle things, mightn’t it?’
‘I wouldn't feel natural as a missis,’ Margaret said comfortably. ‘Miss Judd I am and Miss Judd I'll probably stop, and Raymond will have to take it as he finds it. There'll be plenty like him, I daresay.’
Frances had carried the baby out of the kitchen and was playing with him on the living-room sofa. ‘Why did you call him Raymond?’ she asked. ‘Was it his father’s name?”
‘No, it wasn’t,’ said Margaret. ‘His father’s name was George - or he said it was, anyway.’ She laughed. ‘But I always thought if I got married and had a little boy, I'd call him Raymond. Well, the war happened and I didn’t get married, but I got Raymond.’
‘It's a beautiful name,’ Frances said warmly.
She bought some wool and began knitting for the baby in the evenings. He had very few clothes or other possessions, and when she went to London for a couple of days’ leave, she found that he kept coming into her thoughts, and she bought a little hairbrush with a pale-blue back, a rattle, and a blue sleeping bag. ‘If your baby is an active little fellow, this will keep him snug in all weathers,’ the saleswoman had said as she folded up the sleeping bag, and Frances, somehow enjoying the atmosphere of this shop, where every customer was automatically a mother, said seriously, ‘Well, yes, he is the active type of baby.’ She felt matronly and amused with herself, and wondered if the saleswoman’s eyeglasses would focus less starrily if she knew that the sleeping bag was intended to wrap a nameless Baby Bunting, whose daddy had gone a-hunting and wasn’t likely to come back. ‘Won't he love the ducky pink rabbit on it!’ snuffled the saleswoman with a damp blend of sentiment and catarrh. Here mother- hood was strictly the legitimate article. Frances, conscientiously building up detail, stopped and fingered some tiny night- dresses, assuming the correct brooding expression, on her way to the door. Once outside, she relaxed and began thinking what a funny description she would make out of her shopping in her next letter to Philip. But somehow, though she had been entertained while it was happening, it no longer seemed particularly amusing when she got home, and she put the idea out of her head rather abruptly.
Her homecoming was really very pleasant. There was a letter from Philip waiting for her, and Margaret had got splendid fires going and something good cooking for supper. About a month before, Frances had bought a puppy, because everyone said that a dog was such good company. He was a spaniel puppy, christened Bruce, and now, in a frenzy of welcome, he rushed round the room, fell on her shoes, and sprinkled her affectionately with water. Raymond was also brought in to see her, and though she had been away only two days, she insisted that he had grown. He was really beautiful - not in the least like Margaret, she thought. The unknown George must have been good-looking. Raymond's small face was an obvious duplicate of someone’s strong family face which for generations had been transmitting bright-blue eyes, fresh colour, and a straight nose. Frances thought what a sensation he would have caused if she had been able to take him along and show him off to that woman who had burbled about the ducky pink rabbit.
She produced the sleeping bag and other things and Margaret flushed with pleasure. ‘It’s beautiful!’ she said again and again.
“Well, we shan’t have to worry now about keeping him warm in the garden,’ Frances said lightly.
She sat down to read Philip's letter, with Bruce cuddled beside her. The little fret of someone besides herself in the room was oddly companionable. There was no doubt, she thought, a dog did make a difference, and spaniels were always so devoted. She stroked his curly ears absently as she read. Philip wrote gloomily, for he had thought that he was getting leave and it had fallen through. He had taken bets that the war would be over by Christmas, but now he was feeling less certain. ‘What I mind most is the waste of it all,’ he wrote. ‘Waste of time, waste of you, waste of the good things ‘we could be doing together.’ Later on he made an obvious effort to sound more cheerful, and went into details of some plan for the garden, illustrated with one of his usual neat little maps. Although the time he had spent at the cottage could be counted in days, every inch of its terrain, every twig, every stone seemed to be printed photographically on his memory. It’s really the only link we've had, Frances thought. The only place we've known together, the sticks and stones we share.
Frances put down Philip's letter and sat looking into the fire. She could hear Margaret and Raymond in the kitchen. He had his bath in the evening and usually she enjoyed watching, but this evening she didn’t feel in the mood. Margaret had put down the sleeping bag and other odds and ends when she drew the curtains and she had forgotten to take them to the kitchen with her. Frances picked up the hairbrush and began turning it over in her hands. It had flowers hand-painted on its blue back, and it struck her that perhaps it had been idiotic to choose such frivolities for one whose path would possibly not be particularly flowery. Margaret might take him away at any time and, if she did, Frances hated to think what might happen to them. Maybe it was silly to spoil him like this, as though life could guarantee to wrap him permanently in softest blue wool, guarded by ducky pink rabbits, amused by a bauble of little bells tied up with corals. Frances could hear the splashing of water in the kitchen and a gurgle of enjoyment from Raymond, then Margaret’s voice murmuring something. Unexpectedly Frances felt a pang of irritation against Margaret for having been so stupid or so wanton that Raymond must always be bathed in front of some stranger's fire. Now that she came to think oft, the girl’s jolly, phlegmatic acceptance of her lot was also irritating. That business about being called Mrs. Judd, for instance. If she had thought at all of Raymond's future, she would have fallen in with that suggestion. Frances could have bought her a wedding ring, and they could have agreed on some tale of widowhood which would sound plausible in a village full of women whose men had died as far from home, as quietly, as Frances would have arranged for George to die. She couldn't help feeling indignant when she thought how casual Margaret had been about everything. She's really nothing but a stupid peasant, Frances thought angrily.
Somehow, somewhere, the pleasantness of getting home had escaped. Frances picked up Philip’s letter to read it again, and then, for the first time, she noticed that Bruce had got down from the sofa. The little dog was standing beside the door that led into the kitchen; he was snuffling deeply under the crack and every now and then he scratched hopefully. He liked Margaret, who had a way with animals. Once or twice lately, Frances had searched for him and found him curled up on the kitchen chair, and, though she had laughed, she had always carried him out firmly and closed the door tightly behind her. Now he was scratching and whining to get in. Frances called to him sharply. He took no notice and a wave of quite ridiculous anger seized her. She got up, took the puppy by the scruff of his neck so roughly that he squeaked protestingly, and dumped him back on the sofa. ‘You stay where you are!’ she told him, and as she hit him across his blunt baby nose, she could hardly see him for the tears in her eyes and the dreadful empty feeling in her heart.