IN CLOVER 13 April 1940
At the time the London évacués had come to the village, Miss Vereker, the billeting officer, had looked up from her list and said to Mrs. Clark, ‘You're going to be lucky. You're going to Mrs. Fletcher at the Manor.’ She had smiled as she spoke, the flashing and more than necessarily kind smile that she reserved for the lower orders, who hadn't, don’t you know, had quite the advantages that we have.
None of the Clarks had smiled back at the chintzy lady in the broad hat, sitting with pencil poised as though she were making out a bulb order. Dazed, poor creatures, by the journey, Miss Vereker decided. The baby, sitting impassively in its mother's arms, wore a dirty red knitted cap in which it oddly resembled a wizened old sans-culotte, a mummified Marat with a’snotty nose. It was overpoweringly evident that Mrs. Clark was again — expectant, Miss Vereker delicately phrased it to herself, without noticing that the word didn’t fit in very well with Mrs. Clark’s air of dully awaiting a blow over the head with a blunt instrument. She said quickly, ‘I do hope they've given you a nice cup of tea. A cup of tea does so pull one together, don’t you think?’ Mrs. Clark said hoarsely that she’d had one, and Miss Vereker remembered having observed the party being refreshed across the room, the infant Marat taking a swig from the saucer, So there was nothing to do but give the woman and her three children their labels and send them up to the manor in charge of one of the Girl Guides. Watching the party trail to the door, she wondered doubtfully if dear little Mrs. Fletcher really had known what she was letting herself in for when she volunteered to take in a few of the London évacués.
Little Mrs. Fletcher, it turned out, hadn't an idea. She had two babies of her own and a husband in the Guards, but her notions about all three were pretty innocent. On the afternoon her nurse went out, the harsher facts of infant life were concealed from her by the nursery maid, who let her have fun pretending to fool around with two little dears who were always perfectly dry, perfectly sweet-smelling, and done up in frilly organdie tied with ribbons. Her first sight of the dreadful Clark baby shook her a good deal. It was the same with pregnancy, which she associated with chaise-longues, dreamy meanderings through layette catalogues, and ‘cloud’ dinner dresses that were supposed to blur the unromantic aspects of the affair in layers of chiffon. There was something about the straining third button of Mrs. Clark’s jacket that upset Mrs. Fletcher. Of course, she was perfectly sensible about it. She had known that her guests were coming from one of the poorest parts of London and it was natural they should look dingy, but she had imagined a medium dinginess that would wear off with one or two good scrubbings and a generous handout of gingham pinafores. The dinginess of the Clarks, which seemed to have soaked in far deeper than just their skins, was a setback, but Mrs. Fletcher met it with her most charming smile. She even drew one of the children towards her as she talked, and stood with an arm round his bony shoulders, trying not to shudder, thinking that she must take a good hot bath before she went anywhere near the nursery.
‘I do hope you'll be comfortable,’ she said to Mrs. Clark. ‘It used to be the chauffeur’s flat until he moved into a cottage. There’s a nice bathroom and a little kitchen, and a gas ring in the sitting room that will come in handy for heating up your baby’s bottles and things.’ Then, flustered by the silent, staring Clarks, she cried, ‘And now I know what you'd like! You'd like a nice cup of tea.’
The Clarks heard her without surprise. By now they were used to smiling ladies, old or young, who urged them distractedly to have a nice cup of tea.
Mrs. Fletcher was sensible about the various other setbacks that she encountered in the following weeks. When the young Clarks proved to be no more house-trained than the six- week-old poodle puppy her husband had given her for her birthday, Mrs. Fletcher went up to town in the Rolls and ordered two or three new mattresses and another bale of fleecy peach-coloured blankets; it was really as simple as that. Something told her that none of the servants would welcome the idea of going over and cleaning up for Mrs. Clark, who was obviously incapable of cleaning up for herself, so Mrs. Fletcher hired a village woman, who came up and indignantly shook out mops and flung open windows for an hour every morning. Even this lady’s activities were unable to get the smell out of the place. There didn’t seem to be a disinfectant invented that could drown the Clark smell of grinding, abject poverty, very different from the decent, cottage variety with a red geranium on the window sill, which had been the worst Mrs. Fletcher had encountered up to now.
As the weeks went by, the Clarks began to get her down. happening in Europe, there were still things Mrs. Fletcher would have been unable to help enjoying — simple things, like fine mornings, and the colours the trees were turning, and crumpets for tea by the fire with the dogs attentive and the children being brought down afterwards in their best smocks. Her husband was away, but then all the husbands were away. The old butler was the only man in the house, but flowers were sent in regularly from the greenhouses, her breakfast coffee tasted the same; she was twenty-four years old;in splendid th, and it would have been impossible not to laugh nor d then, even though the radio in the library kept on saying those dreadful things: If it hadn’t been for the Clarks.
That rickety little procession, staggering on mean legs across the pattern of Mrs. Fletcher’s day, seemed like the first warning crack in the safe, dependable fabric of existence. inwasn't the same: Perhaps it never would be again. She would wake in the night and start thinking about the Clarks, and the next morning she would drop in at the chauffeur’s flat to have a cosy, woman- to-woman chat with Mrs. Clark. It never worked out well, though. Mrs. Fletcher tried to talk to Mrs. Clark as she would have talked to any young mother, but it was difficult to think of this flabby creature with the shocking teeth as a young mother. The horrifying notion made Mrs. Fletcher's ears turn rosy among her foxes as she fumbled through her attempts at interplanetary communication, the children standing round her chair, their heads too large and wise above their pot-bellied bodies.
‘I do hope you'll tell me if there’s anything you want,’ she would say earnestly, hopeful that it might all simplify down to something which could be settled by the stroke of a pen on acheque.
At Christmas, the father came to see them. Mrs. Fletcher’s husband was home, too. ‘My God, what a specimen!’ Captain Fletcher said as they passed the Clarks in the lime avenue, Mr. Clark trundling the infant Marat in a push-chair. Mrs. Fletcher sighed. Mr. Clark’s cough floated back to them, resigned and dispirited, like the droop of the shoulders under his shabby coat.
‘How are they going to bear it when the war’s over and they have to go back?’ she said.
“Time enough to start worrying about that when the war's over,’ her husband suggested comfortably.
The war was still going on, however, the morning Miss Vereker, summoned by telephone, pedalled up the lime avenue on her bicycle, bending her head to keep the spring rain out of her eyes. Poor little Mrs. Fletcher, she thought. It really was too bad. She could hardly wait to give up her Burberry and rubbers to the butler before darting in to tell Mrs. Fletcher how bad it was.
‘Taking those poor children back to London just as the air raids may be going to start! And in her condition, with everything so imminent, don’t you know.’ Mrs. Fletcher was still at breakfast; Miss Vereker refused coffee abstractedly. ‘It’s really too disheartening, my dear, after all you did for them.’
‘I thought that they'd settled down. They seemed to be comfortable,’ Mrs. Fletcher said helplessly.
‘Comfortable? Why, they were in clover!’ cried Miss Vereker. ‘Did the woman give any reason for going, or did she simply walk out on you?’
Mrs. Fletcher crumbled a curl of Melba toast. ‘No, she gave a reason. She said that she couldn’t be away from her ‘husband any more. She just wanted to go home.’
Mrs. Fletcher looked flushed and astonished, almost as though she was going to cry. There were various other details to discuss, for after the Clarks had gone it turned out that the chauffeur’s quarters weren't in a very nice condition. It was probably best to be on the safe side and burn nearly everything.
“The expense those ungrateful wretches have put you to!’ Miss Vereker said.
Mrs. Fletcher only wished the rest of the Clark episode could be disposed of so easily. She had a dreadful feeling that something of the Clarks would be there for keeps, making her uncertain, making her believe what the library radio would tell her, even though her breakfast coffee smelled good in its spode cup and the young gardener, kneeling out in the hall with his back to her, was cunningly hiding the ugly freesia pots in a good, deep layer of moss. 
IT’S THE REAL THING THIS TIME 15 June 1940
Major Marriot lived with his unmarried sister in a charming cottage, one of the hundreds all over England which, built for the British workingman, are ending their days in gentility as homes for the poor but snug gentry. Chintzes fluttered at its doll windows and a pretty card, hand-painted by Miss Marriot, warned ‘Heads!’ above the lopsided front door, which usually stood ajar and treated passers-by to a glimpse of an arsenal of Zulu shields, bows, and assagais. The Major, who was a tall man, a grizzled Adonis with a bristling cavalry moustache and a complexion midway between strong Ceylon tea and pigskin, somehow contrived to maintain his erect military bearing, although most of his waking hours were spent in a crouching position, either dodging beams indoors or squatting in the garden weeding. Both he and his sister were fervent gardeners. Little Mrs. Trent, whose husband was in France and who often felt lonely, knew she could find them working on most fine days, the Major busy among the vegetables, Miss Marriot tying up the clematis and wearing a dress so flowery that many foiled bees buzzed angrily round her fora moment before going on to the less deceiving columbines.
‘Come in and have a glass of sherry,’ Miss Marriot would cry through a mouthful of raffia. “You're just in time for the six o'clock news. Gerald! Here is Mrs. Trent!”
The Major was always ready to leave the lettuces and come and twinkle gallantly at a pretty face. He had a soft corner in his heart for Mrs. Trent. Once, when she told him she had heard from her husband the day before but that there hadn’t been any real news about the war because they weren't, of course, allowed to say much, his small, bloodshot eyes rested on her tenderly and he groaned, “There never is any real news. They aren’t goin’ to tell us anything. Did you hear the guns this morning?’ Mrs. Trent said yes, she had heard them. ‘Just practice firin’,’ said the Major, mournfully. ‘For a moment I thought it might be the real thing,’ and he glanced wistfully into the hall, where Mrs. Trent knew that all the paraphernalia of an air-raid warden was laid out on a small table under the assagais. The various pieces of equipment were arranged as neatly as though they were silver bric-a-brac —a whistle, a hand rattle, packets of field dressings, bleach paste for gas casualties, and a large bell which the Major was going to brandish somehow in the intervals between rattling and whistling. Occasionally, Mrs. Trent had seen the Major pick up the rattle, look at it longingly, and put it down again, like a small boy with a parcel which he knows he mustn't open till Christmas.
One evening shortly after the fighting started in Norway, Mrs. Trent went indoors with the Marriots to listen to their radio and drink their sherry. The Major liked the radio turned up so loud that the glossy pink cheeks of Miss Marriot’s Staffordshire figures seemed to wobble on their shuddering bracket. A portrait of some military ancestor in a red coat had been removed to make room for an enormous map of Scandinavia, into which the Major ferociously jabbed flags on pins as he shouted at the radio, “Turn their flank, you fools!’ and ‘That's what you get for mechanisin’ all the cavalry!’ The cottage smelled of furniture cream, lavender in bowls, and of the vegetable curry that the maid was preparing for the evening meal — fiery-hot to please the Major’s palate, full of vitamins for Miss Marriot. Sipping his whisky-and- water, the Major said gloomily, ‘If only they'd ask me, I could tell em something. But when those fellas at the War House put you on the shelf—’ and he got up to lunge a flag into the map as though he wished itwere an assagai between German shoulder blades.
Mrs. Trent knew, of course, how he had offered his services to the country in the early days of the war. She had seen him setting off for the station, debonair in his town clothes and spats, with a late rosebud in his buttonhole. ‘Just runnin’ up to have a chat with someone at the War House!’ he had shouted over the hedge, not forgetting to shoot her the tender, killing glance which made her see what a charmer he must have been, even after that polo pony broke his nose and the Afghan bullet took a nick out of one eyebrow. It was all very painful when he walked the spaniel along to her house and dropped in for a drink late that evening. He was drooping like the rosebud that was still in his buttonhole, and she had to be very fluttering and helpless, to be a silly little woman over finding the whisky decanter and mixing his nasty man’s drink, before he bucked up and told her, with a charming, naive conceit, how surprised the fellas at the War House had been when they learned his real age. ‘I fancy they’d placed me a good ten years younger,’ he said with a chuckle; it had been no good, they had told him politely they didn’t want him. ‘Just a dugout,’ he said, making a joke of it, and sat looking like the spaniel, jowly and mournful, staring with red, blinking eyes out at the English elms that refused to turn into French poplars, the evening sky in which there was a star but never a Very light.
When Germany invaded Holland and Belgium, the tallboy and a couple of sporting prints had to be shifted to make room for another tremendous map, over which the Major brooded lovingly, whistling through his teeth. ‘It’s beginnin’ at last, ‘pon my soul it is,’ he said. ‘Yes; we're in it now, every ‘man, woman, and child of us.’ He took a cigarette and fitted it into his long ivory holder, smiling dreamily to himself. His eyes were very bright. ‘Yes, it’s the real thing this time,’ he said happily. Mrs. Trent didn’t see him or Miss Marriot for the next day or two, so she didn’t know whether he had gone up to town again to interview the War Office. Then one evening she took the dogs for a run past the Marriots’ cottage. The windows were already blacked out, and she was somewhat startled to see a figure standing motionless in the twilight under the apple trees. It turned out to be the Major, staring intently upwards and nursing a gun. He was keepin’ a sharp lookout, he explained, at dawn and dusk, as the authorities had requested. “They dropped the poor devils by parachute in Holland. I shouldn't be a bit surprised if that fella was mad enough to try it here,’ he said hopefully.
He shifted the gun from one arm to the other and looked up again at the sky. Mrs. Trent could see in the half-light that he was smiling sweetly as he sometimes smiled at her, with the rakish twinkle of the born charmer, the absent-minded tenderness of a man who loved women and danger but had somehow ended up with Miss Marriot and a warden’s rattle beneath crossed assagais. The Major looked up for the falling body of a German soldier like a lover watching for a sign from a stubbornly closed window.
“Yes, I shouldn't be surprised if we aren't in for a packet of trouble,’ he said.
THIS FLOWER, SAFETY 6 July 1940
Miss Mildred Ewing had lived at the Hotel San Remo, Crumpington-on-Sea, since the beginning of the war. Her London house, one of those vast, dirty stucco fortresses of the past that are still to be seen in the squares of Belgravia, was untenanted except for an old caretaker living in the basement. Although the rooms had been put away carefully under dust sheets, their contents packed in newspapers or tenderly wrapped in baize, the dust had probably seeped in to lie in the dulling mahogany curlicues of the Chippendale chairs, the Georgian silver must be tarnishing slowly, the china cupids acquiring a film of grey on their dimpled pink thighs. Miss Ewing thought of this gradual disintegration of her property with calm, even with indifference. Before the war cut her life so sharply in two, she had cherished her possessions jealously. The best of the silver had mounted to bed with the butler every night; rather than risk the slapdash methods of the modern housemaid, Miss Ewing had washed the china cupids herself, with her sleeves rolled high on her thin arms and her diamond rings in a little pile beside the basin. Now that she had discovered the important truth that her flesh was as brittle as theirs and far more precious, the safety of china cupids had become irrelevant.
Miss Ewing was safe at Crumpington-on-Sea. She and her elderly maid, Sparks, enjoyed the security of that sunny little watering place, which was sometimes quite like the Riviera, really. Sparks enjoyed it a good deal more than the previous annual sojourns in Nice or Mentone. What with the library and a couple of cinemas and the Crumpington Pavilion, where a women’s orchestra played jolly operatic selections at teatime, Sparks found plenty of entertainment for every minute of the day, and it was nice not to have people speaking a foreign lingo round you. She quickly found cronies, too, for there were other elderly ladies with maids staying at the San Remo. At dinner, the white heads made the dining-room look like a cotton field at harvest; if the war news was ‘upsetting’, they became tremulous and the diamond earrings bobbed and quivered in the frail old ears. Miss Ewing and the other ladies dreaded bad news, because it reacted distressingly on their digestive system, causing quite a run on sodamints at the chemist’s and a constant pattering of feet in the upper corridors of the hotel during the small hours of the morning. On the whole, however, the war seemed reassuringly remote from this cheerful haven - from the attentive headwaiter respectfully suggesting a nice Graves and the Crumpington Pavilion ladies merrily scraping away at Carmen. Everyone said that Crumpington-on-Sea was the safest place in England. One spring day, Mrs. Prentiss received a letter which she read aloud in the lounge. The letter was from her son, who was something high up in the War Office, and it said what a great relief it was to feel that Mrs. Prentiss was there, well out of the way of air raids. Hearing high authority's assurance that they had picked a good spot, Miss Ewing and the other ladies nodded at each other pleasantly over their knitting; all the teagown laps were full of khaki and navy-blue wool that would end up as comforts for the brave boys who were having such a horrid time somewhere so that the Graves could arrive properly chilled on Miss Ewing’s table and Mrs. Prentiss could be lugged in a Bath chair unmolested along the sea front.
“Oh, yes, we're wonderfully safe here,’ said Miss Challoner, shooing her fox terrier off a completed Balaclava. ‘If you come to think of it, there’s nothing near that could possibly interest the Germans — not an aerodrome or a camp or anything.’
The ladies thought of it, and agreed with Miss Challoner that Crumpington did seem to be especially blessed. That night, as she was putting her mistress to bed, Sparks suggested that Miss Ewing might write to the London caretaker and arrange for the most valuable china and silver to be removed to the bank.
‘I don’t care what happens to it,’ said Miss Ewing. ‘I don’t care if I never see it again. Probably I shan’t go back to London when the war is over.’
‘Oh now, Madam, you'd think very different if it was the season starting, and all your friends there, and the opera coming on and all,’ Sparks said, tucking in the eiderdown.
‘No, I shall never go back,’ said Miss Ewing, thinking with a shudder of those dreadfully ‘upsetting’ last days, of the sirens sounding, of people running in the square, their gas masks thumping against their backs. When Sparks thought of London, she saw Miss Ewing in her sables setting off for Covent Garden. When Miss Ewing thought of London, she saw herself lying dead in the wreckage of her father’s Chippendale dining suite, the dust drifting down on her upturned face.
“Mrs. Prentiss’s son says that we're so safe here,’ she said.
‘Yes, we’re in the best place, no doubt, Madam,’ said Sparks. “Though it doesn’t seem that there’s going to be any real war, not what you might call war, does it?’
Feeling pleasantly drowsy, Miss Ewing murmured, ‘Miss Challoner thinks there’s bound to be a revolution in Germany soon. She’s always so well-informed. Pull the curtains right back when you've put the light out, Sparks. I like to hear the sea.
It was a shock when, only a day or two later, things began to happen. One morning, before the old ladies had got their teeth in or their curled fronts adjusted or their stays laced for the day, the terrible noise started. The China tea slopped over in the trembling saucer as Miss Ewing listened, the windows in the Palm Court shivered as though gripped by an ague. At lunchtime nobody could eat, everyone was listening for the next heart-stopping rumble of gunfire. That night there were several muffled explosions that the headwaiter, not so attentive over the wine list as usual, thought might be depth charges out in the Channel.
Later, Sparks, peeping cautiously through the bedroom curtains, reported big flashes from the sea. ‘It’s a raid going on over there, I should say, Madam,’ she said. She looked mysteriously flushed and exhilarated, something like an elderly vivandiére as she clutched the bottle of brandy that Miss Ewing always had, in case of emergencies, beside her bed.
‘Put down the brandy and go to bed,’ Miss Ewing commanded her sharply.
Miss Ewing had a shocking night and came down next morning, grey-faced, to find that one or two of the more nervous hotel guests had already left. The gunfire rumbled away across the Channel all that week, sometimes louder, sometimes softer. A picture fell off the wall in Miss Challoner’s room, narrowly missing the fox terrier, and Mrs. Prentiss’s son wrote that it might be as well if his mother tried a change, say to Torquay, for a bit. After she had gone the rout set in. The lift made innumerable wheezing journeys up and down, packed with suitcases. Hired Daimlers stood at the door, and the old ladies stepped in, followed by maids with rugs and jewel cases, and sped away, part of the tragic pattern of speeding cars, trudging people, laden farm carts, that was spreading out over the face of Europe. Miss Ewing went, too, having wired to a married nephew who lived in the depths of the country, far removed from the coast, to expect her and Sparks for a visit.
Miss Ewing arrived at her nephew’s old house and was comforted because it was set so deeply in leafy lanes. For the first few days she did nothing but sit about listening to the silence, drinking it in greedily, as though it were a precious draught of spring water. Planes passed overhead a good deal, but she was quickly able to distinguish the red, white, and blue circles, and after a bit they gave her a comfortable feeling of security, like the sight of a policeman going the rounds at night. With a little imagination, it would almost have been possible to forget the war completely. Of course, there was the wireless, but she avoided listening to it as much as possible. Her nephew and his wife listened at all hours; their eldest boy had got his commission in October. Miss Ewing sat out in the garden and knitted him a Balaclava. Her appetite was marvellous. During those terrible last days at Crumpington she had been unable to eat anything, but now she ate an excellent dinner, slept like a top, and woke up looking forward to the weighty breakfast tray with which Sparks staggered upstairs every morning.
“We're so safe here, Sparks. We ought to be very grateful,’ she said, pouring out her coffee and just glancing quickly at the headlines of the nice little picture paper, which made everything sound so much better than The Times did. Sparks, who hankered after the fleshpots of Crumpington, agreed somewhat sourly.
One night, a week or so after Miss Ewing’s arrival, her nephew and his wife discussed in low tones the possibility of Aunt Mildred’s leaving, and decided hopelessly that she was there for the duration. Fate, however, arranged otherwise. A couple of nights later a lone German bomber, making off ina hurry after an unsuccessful search for the flying field from which Miss Ewing’s friendly red, white, and blue planes came, unloaded his bombs over some woods only a mile or so from the house. The noise of the explosions, followed by the sound of fire engines dashing by, the local gentlemen in wardens’ tin hats rushing about, the sight of Sparks shivering in the gas mask which she had donned at the first explosion all put Miss Ewing in a state of prostration which even the brandy couldn’t help much. Next day a man was putting new glass in the damaged windows as Miss Ewing came downstairs, gloved and toqued, followed by Sparks, white-faced from night alarums and morning packing. While they waited for the hired car, Miss Ewing’s nephew asked where she was going. The wings on her toque quivered agitatedly as she cried, ‘Anywhere! Anywhere to be quiet, to be safe!’ Less vaguely, she said that she was heading for a secluded hotel, high on a Welsh mountain; what seemed like a systematic German persecution could hardly follow her there.
“You'll be just in time to get a good view of the invasion from Ireland, Aunt Mildred,’ her nephew said with a touch of malice.
Tugging at a doeskin glove so violently that it split at the seam, she stared at him and groaned, ‘Do they really think it will come that way?”
‘It’s been suggested,’ he said.
“Then where — where can one count on being safe?’ cried Miss Ewing, reaching for her bag as though she had a vague idea that it might contain the note, the coin, with which to purchase this urgent necessity.
‘Nowhere,’ he said sombrely.
At that moment the car appeared and Miss Ewing, getting in, sped away once more with her maid, her jewel case, her travelling rugs — the sad little caravan which was all that remained of her treasure on earth. If necessary for her safety, she would jettison even those remnants as ruthlessly as the German pilot had jettisoned his bombs. To be safe, that was all that mattered — to die in her own time and her own bed and not be splattered with anonymous violence over some stranger's field. ‘It’s such a quiet hotel, right up on that mountain,’ she said to the silent Sparks. ‘Nothing like the San Remo, of course, but it’s well out of the way of things. There's nothing round there that could possibly attract — you know what.’ After a pause she added loudly, defiantly, as though someone had spoken, ‘Nothing!’ and dabbed her handkerchief against her unsteady lips.