AS THE FRUITFUL VINE
31 August 1940
Lucy Grant had to admit that none of the big moments of her life had really come up to expectations. Something had always missed fire somewhere. When she thought back to all the memorable occasions of her twenty-five years, they greeted her with the identical damp, depressing fizzle of squibs which hadn't performed quite according to schedule. Her childhood was littered with these disappointments, her adolescence offered example after example of the budding and wilting of bright hopes. There had been the time, for instance, of her graduation from Oxford with honours, a proud moment entirely overshadowed by her elder sister’s engagement to a more than satisfactory suitor. It was amazing how often Valerie had been responsible for the damping and wilting process. Of course, it couldn't be said that she had anything to do with directing the limelight away from Lucy at Lucy’s own wedding. That was the fault of the war, which made it necessary for her and Philip Grant to get married quietly during one of his hurried leaves, without any of the trimmings of gold braid, crossed swords, fluttering brides- maids, and admiring friends to which she had looked forward. Although naturally she was blissfully happy, she couldn’t help being a little regretful.
After a few days’ honeymoon, Philip had to rejoin his ship, and it was with the greatest astonishment that Lucy discovered in due course that she was going to have a baby. It seemed less like a marital than a botanical incident, the result of a chance brush between a bee and a flower. This discovery of motherhood ought to have been stirring, but again a big moment didn’t quite come off. Paternity would catch up with Philip somewhere in the West Indies or the Mediterranean or wherever Lucy’s startled letter reached him; his reply would reach her long after any emotions which she might have been feeling at the moment of writing his letter had passed. To be truthful, those emotions were not overpowering. It was difficult to work up emotion over a tender secret which had to be shouted to a bee who was now winging his way God knows where. Once more, Lucy felt, life had treated her cruelly.
The way in which her family received the news was also as she might have expected. Her parents, instead of raising an excited to-do about the first grandchild, did not try to hide the fact that they considered 1940 an inauspicious year for babies. ‘You might,’ said her mother reproachfully, ‘have waited.’ Lucy had imagined her weeping a little and immediately setting to work on something complicated in fuzzy pink Angora, but both these impulses were out of date in aworld where the bombs were already dropping fast. In her mother’s day a pregnant woman spent a good deal of time on a sofa, thinking beautiful thoughts and resolutely avoiding unpleasant ones; people took care not to speak of anything shocking or violent in front of her. Nowadays shocking things turned up on the doorstep with the morning paper; violence was likely to crash out of a summer sky on a woman who could move only slowly and who was not as spry as usual at throwing herself on her face in the gutter. Belatedly, Lucy’s mother explained, ‘Of course, I’m glad, darling. It’s only that I wish you'd chosen a happier time — you and Philip.’ The anxious lines settling deeper round her eyes, she said, ‘I’m sure Philip would want you to be very careful, Lucy dear. Don’t bother to read too many papers, and don’t listen to that horrible wireless more than you need. All you've got to think about from now on is keeping well and cheerful and having a healthy, beautiful baby.’ It seemed only a step from there to a few cosy tears and a chat about pink Angora, but her courageous Coué broke down miserably. ‘Daddy and I think that you’d better move out of that flat,’ she said. ‘It’s got no air-raid shelter at all.’ Her worried eyes told Lucy that she didn’t really believe all that smooth stuff about having a healthy, beautiful baby. She believed only in terror and a grandson who would always be slightly queer because he was born, as people would whisper significantly, during one of the worst air bombardments of the war.
Lucy found that her friends reacted to the news in the same way. Women’s eyes had a habit of sliding past her with a clairvoyant look; in that brief, unguarded second between smiles her friends listened only too plainly to ghostly bombs crashing. Although she was feeling remarkably well, their manner assumed that she was a stretcher case already. She had hoped to have fun discussing layettes and possible names, but so far as she could see, the spectacle of an expectant young mother with a gas mask thumping against her ribs turned the thoughts of observers to deep shelters rather than to organdie. Aunts who had always been fonder of Valerie now kissed Lucy with mournful affection and asked her to stay with them in the country. ‘London at this time of year is so hot and dusty,’ they put it delicately. Lucy began to feel like a housemaid who had gone wrong and was being treated with inflexible kindness by some charitable organisation. After she gave up the flat and moved home, to please her mother, there was a conspiracy to keep any news of naval losses from her, since the clairvoyant friends knew that something was bound to happen to Philip. She arrived home one afternoon to find her mother, white and tremulous, hovering over a telegram which turned out to be from a cousin who was coming up from Devonshire for the sales and wanted Lucy to meet her at a matinée. Holding the telegram, Lucy looked apologetically at her mother, who was pretending, with a touch of hysteria, that of course she had guessed it was from Monica all the time. Monica’s mother was one of the aunts who had suggested that Lucy should come down and stay for a bit. ‘Now, why don’t you go back with Monica?’ Lucy’s mother said, looking at her eagerly. ‘The change would do you good, darling.’
‘I might,’ Lucy said.
Perhaps it would be a relief to get out of London, the city in which she seemed to be the only pregnant woman. Although it was too early for any change to show in her figure, she was morbidly certain that people in the street stared at her with pity and curiosity; the manner of the shopgirl who sold her some little vests yesterday had been surely over-solicitous. At a time in her life when she might reasonably expect to feel proud and happy, she felt merely sheepish. It really was too bad.
Valerie turned up next day, looking cool and trim in her nurse’s uniform. She and Bernard had given their country house to be used as a convalescent home for officers; photographs of Valerie, sitting efficiently at her desk or smiling efficiently at a convalescent major lying wrapped in rugs on the terrace, had appeared in one or two of the weeklies. Valerie had always been efficient as far back as Lucy could remember. The war was going well for her, like everything else. Bernard had an important job which kept him in London.
‘For heaven's sake,’ she said to Lucy, ‘do go to Aunt Kitty's and stop us all having miscarriages for you every time the siren goes.’
“But it’s such nonsense,’ said Lucy feebly. ‘I’m strong as a horse. I've never felt better.’
Valerie looked at her. ‘I'll admit this business of having a baby suits you,’ she said. ‘You're positively blooming.”
‘There was something strangely grudging in her expression which made Lucy glance at her with sudden attention, and the conventional words somehow didn’t sound quite right. For a moment Lucy sat perfectly still, then she asked, softly and carelessly, ‘Why haven't you and Bernard ever tried it, Val? I’ve often wondered.”
Valerie got up and took a cigarette from the box on the table. She was rather a time lighting it and finding a place to put the match. ‘Well, I don’t know,’ she said. ‘I suppose we wanted a few years first. Then the war came, and it didn’t seem a good time.’ When she turned round there was nothing in her face but the familiar derisive amusement. ‘You know, only rash creatures like you and Philip would think of starting a family right slap in the middle of Armageddon.’
‘Yes, only fools like Phil and me,’ said Lucy placidly.
‘I've got to get that train,’ said Valerie. ‘Don’t get up.’
‘I believe I'll go to Aunt Kitty’s after all,’ said Lucy suddenly. ‘Phil wouldn't want me to take risks.’
When the front door banged, Lucy went to the window and watched her sister walk down the street looking for a taxi. Valerie had got thinner, Lucy noticed; it wasn’t difficult to guess the type of lean, rangy Englishwoman she would be in her middle years. Neither had it been difficult to guess, a few minutes back, that she and Bernard had wanted a child ever since their marriage but that no sort of miracle would give them one. Clairvoyance wasn’t the prerogative of the kindly women who glanced briefly at Lucy’s waistline and then away. Lucy thought that she might go out, too; there was some shopping she wanted to do. When she went to put on her hat, she looked at herself for a moment in the long mirror. She was wearing a print dress with a soft, gathered bosom, and it struck her that for the first time the lines of her slim figure showed signs of what was happening to her. She surveyed herself from all angles with a sleepy, satisfied smile. As Valerie got thinner, she herself would probably get plumper and prettier, for of course she and Philip would have more babies.
When she boarded a bus at the corner, it was something in her face rather than her figure which made the conductor say, ‘Careful now, Ma’am,’ and steady her with a hand under the elbow. She moved delicately up the crowded bus and sat down. Newspaper posters strung some tale of horror along the railings, but she looked at them vaguely, thinking that she had better buy some new sweaters for the long, dreaming autumn at Aunt Kitty’s.
 LUNCH WITH MR. BIDDLE 7 December 1940
 Women of all ages liked Winthrop Biddle — ‘He’s a great dear’ was the expression they generally used — and he was devoted to the whole sex in the cosy way of an uncle who enjoys the confidence of a vast number of totally unrelated nieces. His feminine friends knew that he could be relied upon to provide a lunch, a bed, sound advice, or a cast-iron alibi as required, and not to go in for jolly avuncular pouncings in taxis. Never a pouncer even in his youth, in this mellow later phase he was really a perfect example of an elderly English bachelor. Since men liked him, too, his circle of friends and acquaintances was immense. The drawing-room of his small, neat house in Devonshire, where he lived with a devoted housekeeper, was crammed with photographs of charming women and distinguished men inscribed affectionately to their dear old friend Winnie. If they were not actually distinguished themselves, they were sure to be closely related to someone whowas; Mr. Biddle had a harmless weakness for people with labels attached.
Before the war he had been an adept at finding unspoilt little places on the Riviera where one could live for a song and where one or another of his women friends —- Mme. Delacroix, who used, you know, to be one of the Derbyshire Melton-Bagburys, or little Mrs. Maverick, whose mother had been, you remember, a famous Edwardian beauty in her day — had a large and hospitable villa. Now that the war had put an end to these excursions, there was nothing for it but to stay at home and sink gracefully, as he himself put it, with his loud, jolly laugh, into a peaceful, gardening old age.
Mr. Biddle’s ideas of peace differed considerably, however, from most people’s. The spare room at Four Winds was generally occupied by one of a procession of nieces, and Mr. Biddle spent a good deal of time on the telephone inviting his choicer neighbours to little lunch parties or little musical evenings, stiffened, of course, with imported celebrities or near-celebrities from London. ‘I do want you to come!’ he would shout. ‘Effie Trumpington is coming. . . . Of course you know Effie Trumpington. She may not be able to sing for us. You know about her trouble, of course, poor dear.’ Satisfied by a polite murmur at the other end of the wire, he would go on to say that he particularly wanted the murmurer’s presence at the party because they were going to try out a rather pleasant Alsace wine he had discovered for a song. (Mr. Biddle always arranged some sort of little novelty — a wine or an amusing table decoration or a Provengal way of cooking chicken that his housekeeper really didn’t boggle too badly, considering that she had to leave out the truffles and the butter.) ‘And I know,’ Mr. Biddle would continue, ‘what a judge you are. Now, I hope you can manage it, my dear fellow. It’s such a joy to see people in these dreadful days when one never knows what may happen next. Did you hear the bombs in the night? I suppose they were after the camp again. I was out half the night — so tiresome! Well, eight o'clock, then. I do trust that I shan’t be called out in the middle of dinner by these fearful, inconsiderate bounders.’
The work of an air-raid warden was Mr. Biddle’s war effort, and the affectionate adopted nieces thought it really awfully sporting of the dear old thing, clapping a tin hat on his bald head and cycling round the neighbourhood blowing a whistle at all hours. Since Four Winds was surrounded by several juicy military objectives, he was kept pretty busy.
One night an inconsiderate bounder jettisoned a couple of bombs in a field at the bottom of Mr. Biddle’s garden, breaking one or two windows of the house and joggling a charming little sketch of St. Tropez off the wall in the dining-room. Mr. Biddle was as ruddy and smiling as ever when describing the incident to his assembled lunch party next day. ‘You shall have a peep at the craters after lunch if you're good,’ he said to Dora Cunningham, who was there not because she was related to anyone especially distinguished but on the strength of her looks. Mr. Biddle flashed his spectacles and his false teeth at her like an amiable cannibal. ‘It makes, I think, rather a nice little contrast,’ he said. ‘The onslaughts of barbarism in the night, the pleasures of civilisation and beauty today. You're in great good looks, Dora, dear child.’ He turned to another guest. “Tell me what you think of the Amontillado, General. I got it for a song through Bobbie Thrupp — you know, Thrupp & Cantelupe, the wine merchants in St. James's Street. I know, of course, what a judge you are.’
The lunch party promised to be wholly successful, Mr. Biddle thought happily. Dora Cunningham, decoratively displaying her legs on the sofa, represented the fair; the brave and the brainy were not forgotten. General Sysonby, looking judicious over the Amontillado, represented the one, and the other was present in the person of Ursula Farmer, a woman novelist who had been bombed out of Hampstead and was now smouldering creatively in a cottage on the common, whence Mr. Biddle had triumphantly unearthed her. The party was completed by Mrs. Sysonby and a Mr. Potts, who was unremarkable in himself but whose aunt had travelled extensively in Tibet. Mr. Biddle, as he went round with the sherry, managed to murmur to General Sysonby, ‘You've probably read Ursula Farmer’s Give Us This Day. Unpleasant stuff but brilliant. No doubt about that.’ Leaving the General looking somewhat alarmed, he sketched details rapidly to Miss Farmer. ‘Sysonby of the Punjab — magnificent soldier. Grows the best roses of anyone round here.’ Dora Cunningham’s legs, being self-evident, required no explanation.
Lunch was announced by Mr. Biddle’s gardener, who on these occasions was summoned from the herbaceous border and crammed into a black coat. The presence of this heavily breathing servitor gave to the entertainment a native flavour which Mr. Biddle considered every bit as original as the Provengal dishes.
It was not until halfway through the meal that Mr. Biddle realised with dismay that things were not going well. He quickly traced the trouble. Dora, whose business it was to look delectable and keep her mouth shut, had been inspired by the Amontillado or the devil to chip in on Miss Farmer's interesting discussion with General Sysonby about the possibility of invasion. Miss Farmer, who was there to utter, and not to bother about looking delectable, was doing the one all right but was also trying to do the other with an occasional meaningful smile at the General which implied that they must pause for a minute to let the child prattle. The child was beginning to look peevish and unbecomingly flushed.
Mr. Biddle, breathing love and amity, rushed to the rescue by drawing everyone’s attention to the centrepiece of flowers; which he had made himself out of bits of shell, cork, and glue. ‘It’s work that your clever little fingers could do, I know, Dora,’ he said, but only Mrs. Sysonby really took an interest. When Mr. Biddle succeeded in disengaging himself from Mrs. Sysonby and was able again to lend an anxious ear to the conversation at the other end of the table, he found that Miss Farmer had led it into deep waters in the hope of shaking off Dora, who, however, had plunged valiantly after her, to the total neglect of Mr. Potts. The General, caught like Paris between Athene and Aphrodite, was twirling his wineglass in glum silence. It seemed possible that the ladies, leaning their panting bosoms nearer, would shortly be growling over him in open conflict on the mat. Really, thought Mr. Biddle despairingly, it was naughty of Dora. No one was performing, and the gardener was being maddeningly slow in handing the crépes flambées, which, Mr. Biddle’s nose told him, were burnt.
Happily, Mrs. Sysonby made a diversion by remarking on the Basque table mats, which Mr. Biddle had bought at Biarritz. “They make me feel I’m in France,’ she said. ‘Oh, those winters on the Riviera, Mr. Biddle! When will they ever come again?’
Before Mr. Biddle could answer, Dora had observed that she, for one, didn't care if they never did. ‘I wouldn't set foot in that beastly country if you paid me,’ she said. ‘Of course, you may have some special reason for feeling like that,’ said Miss Farmer, smiling at the General and making it sound as though she suspected Dora of having been betrayed by a poilu on a day trip to Boulogne. She went on to say that it was difficult to see how anyone of intelligence — here she paused for a second, which seemed to unhappy Mr. Biddle cruelly interminable — could blame the many for the crimes of the few. Anyone who really knew France and the French, that is. It turned out that Miss Farmer knew France and the French better than they did themselves. Mr. Biddle, miserably chewing cold crépes flambées, had a confused impression that she mentioned a French maternal grandmother, which was awkward, as Dora had just registered her opinion that the French were a low, immoral people whom it was impossible to trust. Clearing his throat, the General began carefully, ‘I daresay, when the history fellas come to weigh things up, there will be found to be faults on —’ but Dora brushed him aside with a fierce ‘I thought that Dunkirk settled it for most people. I had a brother there.’
It seemed that the affair was going to develop into a personal scrap between Dora’s brother and Miss Farmer’s grandmother. Mr. Biddle noted with alarm that his two embattled guests were rapidly purpling. Something, he felt, should have warned him —some lack of the essential feminine perfume in Miss Farmer’s makeup, some waspishness hidden beneath Dora’s delicious exterior — that the mixture was chemically impossible. Casting round desperately for a topic that would offend no one, he remembered Mr. Pott’s foot- loose aunt and asked if she had written anything new about Tibet. Mr. Potts was reluctantly transferring his mesmerized attention from the battle of the goddesses to Mr. Biddle when a new voice spoke louder than any at the lunch table.
Never before had Mr. Biddle heard the air-raid siren with sensations of relief and delight. Jumping to his feet, he cried, ‘Such a nuisance, but I'll have to go off! Don’t disturb yourselves, any of you dear people. Carter is just going to bring coffee.’ On his way to the bicycle shed, he put his head in at the dining-room window and called, ‘If things get at all noisy, Sysonby, take the ladies under the stairs!’
Bicycling down the drive, settling his tin hat more firmly with one hand, Mr. Biddle had a pleasing vision of Dora and Miss Farmer sitting together under the stairs among his bottles of Amontillado. Since there was nothing like a diversion of this nature for getting people acquainted, the dear ladies would probably emerge cobwebby but the best of friends. The tottering balance of the lunch party had been saved in the nick of time. Really, thought Mr. Biddle happily, he couldn't be more grateful to the siren, which he pictured as yet another niece, even more toothsome than little Dora, sitting on a rock and moaning to oblige old Uncle Winnie. He could hear the inconsiderate bounders zooming faintly somewhere in the pale-blue sky, and presently the explosion of several bombs. Dora and Miss Farmer would certainly be under the stairs by now, probably holding hands. Spinning along the road, Mr. Biddle put his whistle in his mouth and blew a long, triumphant blast.
BATTLE OF THE GREEKS 8 March 1941
The Red Cross sewing party met twice a week in Mrs. Ramsay's dining-room to stitch pyjamas, drink a dish of tea, and talk about their menfolk. Mrs. Ramsay found pretty soon that she was in possession of all sorts of unsuspected facts about the husbands of the village — Mrs. Peters’ husband, for instance, who was the head groom up at the big house. Mrs. Ramsay felt that she would never be able to look at his neat, gaitered legs and fox-terrier face again without remembering that he had cold feet in bed. ‘Ow, terrible!’ Mrs. Peters had sighed, rounding off a buttonhole. ‘I always say to him, “Daddy,” I say, “one might as well put one’s feet up against a frog.” It was also interesting to discover that Mr. Lovelace, from Tuppers Farm, had swallowed his auntie’s thimble as a child and that Mr. Garner, the big house’s second gardener, was always attacked by bees on account of his upstanding hair. Mrs. Ramsay, sitting listening in a white overall so crackling that it hurt, felt she ought to produce some fascinating anecdote about Mr. Ramsay, but could think of none that would bear relating.
There was a day, however, when the conversation took a more international turn. It was impelled that way by Mrs. Ramsay's suggestion that the next parcel of comforts might possibly be sent to the Greeks, on whose behalf the wife of the Greek Minister was appealing.
‘The Greeks!’ said Mrs. Peters suspiciously. ‘Ow, what an original idea!’ She held up the pair of trousers she was making and regarded them with a frown, as though meditating what it would be like to put one’s feet up against a Greek.
The rest of the sewing party looked dubiously at Mrs. Ramsay. The idea of swathing Grecian torsos in good English winceyette was obviously difficult to digest right away. Mrs. Twistle coughed gently. Everything about Mrs. Twistle, who had been in service with a ducal family as a girl, was gentle, even her way of uttering sentiments that would have set the strawberry leaves shuddering with the cold breath of revolution. Mrs. Ramsay could never repress a start when, in a voice soft as a dove’s, Mrs. Twistle would murmur, “There are heads in high places, Madam, as should be rolling on Tower Hill’ or ‘If I had my way, there are plenty of gentlemen in the present government who I would like - excuse me, Madam - to take out and shoot against a wall.’ Having gently coughed, Mrs. Twistle whispered, ‘I suppose, Madam, that the Greek gentlemen would be wearing pyjamas? In the photographs they're always in little, short sort of petticoat affairs.’
‘Oh dear, Mrs. Twistle! It would be terrible if we sent our lovely pyjamas and then they didn’t wear them!’ Mrs. Lovelace cried, plucking her glasses off her nose in her agitation.
“Ow, not in bed! They wouldn't wear their petticoats in bed!’ Mrs. Peters exclaimed robustly, provoking a choking explosion of giggles from Miss Lovelace, the only virgin present in the austere company of matrons.
‘Hem this sleeve, Elsie,’ said her mother, and the virgin subsided, her face crimson.
Everyone now appealed to Mrs. Ramsay, as the most worldly member of the party, to settle the question of Greek male slumber wear. ‘Hark at us all arguing when Mrs. Ramsay can tell us!’ cried Mrs. Garner. The table turned its collective gaze upon her, as though confident that she had bedded with half the heroes in The Iliad. Mrs. Ramsay thought distractedly of the only Greek in her life, a stout London restaurant proprietor who had stood grilling skewered lamb and garlic over charcoal, wearing neither petticoats nor pyjamas but a stained serge suit. The memory didn’t seem really helpful. Happily, she recollected that the Greek Minister's wife had specifically asked for pyjamas, and the party relaxed, breathing heavily.
‘Greeks!’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘Well, wait until I tell Daddy! He'll have a good laugh at me stitching away for the Greeks. Kind of little men, aren’t they?’ She held up the trousers again. ‘I suppose these are going to fit them?’
The garments in question looked to Mrs. Ramsay as though they would accommodate not only a Greek but a couple of Albanians too, but she uttered soothing words.
‘Well, poor fellows, it must be bitterly cold up on those mountains,’ said Mrs. Lovelace. ‘It’s sort of nice to think that our pyjamas are going to keep them warm. And when you think how splendid they're being, chasing off that nasty Mussolini — Mrs Twistle coughed gently again and remarked with implacable softness that the Greeks were very marvellous, no doubt, but in her opinion it was a pity that England had to have foreign allies monkeying about with her war.
‘Ow well, I’m not all that narrow-minded,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘After all, if you have allies, they’ve got to be foreign. Stands to reason. And as Daddy says, it’s not the poor things’ fault that they can’t speak the King’s English proper. We should look nice fools, Mrs. Twistle, parleyvooing in Athens, no doubt. May I trouble you for the box of pins, Mrs. Garner? I thank you.”
Mrs. Twistle’s pink cheeks went two shades pinker and her Alexandra coiffure was tremulous with emotion. Her voice, however, remained mild as ever as she whispered that she had nothing against the Greeks, mind you — nothing whatever. “There’s no doubt, Mrs. Peters, that they’re a fine lot of men. It’s only that if | had my way, we’d have nothing to do with foreigners. We're better off without them, though there are those in high places, I’m well aware, as don’t see eye to eye.”
‘Ow, and how about the Americans?’ Mrs. Peters asked sarcastically. ‘I suppose you're going to tell me that if they wanted to come over and help us, you wouldn’t let them, on account of them being, as you might say, foreigners.’
‘I would not,’ replied Mrs. Twistle.
At this interesting juncture, Mrs. Dogberry, who was deaf, shouted out, ‘Ready for buttons!’ Half a dozen hands reached out cards of buttons to her, and the party settled back again to listen to Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Twistle.
‘I'm sure I don’t want to contradict you, Mrs. Twistle,’ said Mrs. Peters, ‘but I must say I think you're wrong. Daddy says that if the Americans came over and fought, we'd have the Nasties beaten before the end of the year.’
‘How lovely that would be,’ Mrs. Ramsay murmured, hoping to make a diversion.
Mrs. Twistle refused to be side-tracked. ‘In my opinion, Mrs. Peters,’ she said with ominous calm, ‘we should have been better off without the Americans in the last war, if it comes to that.’
‘Ow, now, really, Mrs. Twistle!’ Mrs. Peters laughed in a superior way. ‘Everyone knows that if they hadn’t come in when they did, we should have lost the war. And they was a splendid lot of young men. Daddy says —’
“With all due respect to Mr. Peters,’ said Mrs. chilling stateliness — Mrs. Ramsay, shuddering slightly, could imagine her using the same tone to announce ‘Your Grace, the tumbril waits’ - ‘with ail due respect, splendid no doubt they was, but uncommon late they was also. By the time they arrived, our boys had done all the work, Mrs. Peters, and there was nothing for them to do. Mr. Twistle always says the same.”
‘Ow, there was nothing for them to do, wasn’t there?’ Mrs. Peters said. ‘What about the battles they was in? What about the American war memorial? I suppose they put that up just in memory of the trip across the Atlantic, Mrs. Twistle? Daddy could tell you a very different story. He was right beside the American boys in France, and he says they fought like hellcats, Mrs. Twistle. If you don’t mind my saying so, I think Daddy might be allowed to know better than Mr. Twistle, who wasn’t never there. Like hellcats, he said, and you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, yes!’
There was now, Mrs. Ramsay observed, not a heave to choose between the Twistle and Peters bosoms. High drama was in the air. Needles were still while the shivering Greeks waited. Miss Lovelace, whose risible faculties seemed equally moved by the Muses of Comedy and Tragedy, gave a sudden wild giggle and was sharply told by her mother to hem a sleeve.
‘Pardon me, Mrs. Peters, but my ‘usband was there,’ Mrs. Twistle said, mislaying, in her agitation, one of the refined ‘h’s acquired in the ducal household. ‘My ’usband was in France from 1915 to 1918.’
‘Ow, but behind the lines, Mrs. Twistle, behind the lines,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘Daddy was in the lines all the time.’
Mrs. Ramsay was waiting apprehensively for Mrs. Twistle’s reply to this crushing statement when Mrs. Dogberry suddenly came to the rescue. Having been quietly sewing, blissfully unconscious of the high-voltage currents crackling round her head, she shouted across the table, ‘How are chickens laying, Mrs. Twistle? Mine are right off — all the mucky stuff they put in the chicken food nowadays, likely.’
There was a pause, then Mrs. Twistle replied with dignity, ‘Thank you, Mrs. Dogberry, but I can’t complain. My little pullets are giving me my steady five.’
The crisis was over. Mrs. Ramsay breathed again. Stirring from its drugged trance, the table began to babble of hot mashes and crop-bound hens. A few minutes later, Mrs. Ramsay was electrified to hear Mrs. Peters say magnanimously, ‘I passed by your place the other afternoon, Mrs. Twistle, and I thought those Light Sussex birds of yours were looking real lovely.’
‘They’re nice,’ Mrs. Twistle admitted, ‘but they don’t give the brown eggs like your Rhode Island Reds do, Mrs. Peters.’
When the compliments had died down, Mrs. Ramsay asked cautiously, ‘Then it’s agreed? We'll send the next lot of pyjamas to the Greeks?’
‘Ow, yes, send them to the Greeks by all means,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘It'll be a nice change for them to get their limbs into something cosy after those little skirts, poor lads.’
‘I think it would be ever so nice, Madam,’ said Mrs. Twistle softly. ‘After all, they’re doing very wonderfully, aren’t they? If those in high places don’t see that we help them as much as possible, there’s heads as will certainly roll when the voice of the people is heard. May I trouble you for the loan of your scissors, Mrs. Peters?”
‘Help yourself, Mrs. Twistle,’ said Mrs. Peters.